CIK: 1409269
Company Name: RESTORATION ROBOTICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2019-03-20
Accession Number: 0001564590-19-008643


Item 1 Business. Item 1 I PART 2 This Annual Report Form 10 K also contains estimates, projections and other information concerning our industry, our business, and hair restoration market, including data regarding the estimated size of the hair restoration market. Information that is based on estimates, forecasts, projections, market research or similar methodologies is inherently subject to uncertainties and actual events or circumstances may differ materially from events and circumstances reflected in this information. Unless otherwise expressly stated, we obtained this industry, business, market and other data from reports, research surveys, studies and similar data prepared by market research firms and other third parties, industry, medical and general publications, government data and similar sources. These forward looking statements are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts, and projections about our business and the industry in which we operate and management's beliefs and assumptions and are not guarantees of future performance or development and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that are in some cases beyond our control. As a result, any or all of our forward looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10 K may turn out to be inaccurate. Factors that could materially affect our business operations and financial performance and condition include, but are not limited to, those risks and uncertainties described herein under Item 1A Risk Factors. You are urged to consider these factors carefully in evaluating the forward looking statements and are cauti1d not to place undue reliance on the forward looking statements. The forward looking statements are based on information available to us as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Unless required by law, we do not intend to publicly update or revise any forward looking statements to reflect new information or future events or otherwise. You should, however, review the factors and risks we describe in the reports we will file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. developments and projections relating to our competitors and our industry, including competing therapies and procedures. estimates of our expenses, future revenue, capital requirements, our needs for additional financing and our ability to obtain additional capital; and the scope of protection we are able to establish and maintain for intellectual property rights covering ARTAS, along with any product enhancements; the implementation of our business model and strategic plans for our business and technology; the effective pricing of ARTAS; our expectations regarding the potential market size and the size of the patient populations for ARTAS; the timing or likelihood of regulatory filings and approvals for expanding the approved use of ARTAS for use in dissecting hair follicles to include women and individuals without straight brown or black hair; our intentions and our ability to establish collaborations and or partnerships; our financial performance; the continuing productivity and effectiveness of our commercial infrastructure and salesforce; our commercialization, marketing and manufacturing capabilities, plans and prospects; System, including our ARTAS iX System, or ARTAS, for use in harvesting hair follicles for transplant; the continued growth in demand for our ARTAS the proposed Merger between the Company and Venus, the anticipated timing of the Merger and our ability to successfully complete the Merger; This Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2018 contains forward looking statements concerning our business, operations, and financial performance and condition as well as our plans, objectives, and expectations for business operations and financial performance and condition. Any statements contained herein that are not of historical facts may be deemed to be forward looking statements. In some cases, you can identify these statements by words such as anticipate, assume, believe, could, estimate, expect, intend, may, plan, should, will, would, and other similar expressions that are predictions of or indicate future events and future trends. These forward looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about CAUTIONARY INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS i 113 Signatures 108 Exhibits, Consolidated Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 107 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 107 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 107 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 107 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 107 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 106 Other Information Item 9B. 106 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 106 Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 79 Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 78 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Item 7A. 65 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 63 Selected Consolidated Financial Data Item 6. 62 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 61 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 61 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 61 Item 2 Properties
