CIK: 1494891
Company Name: SENSUS HEALTHCARE INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2021-03-05
Accession Number: 0001213900-21-013664


Item 1 BUSINESS Overview Sensus Healthcare, Inc. (together, with its subsidiary, unless the context otherwise indicates, Sensus or the Company ) is a medical device company committed to providing highly effective, non invasive and cost effective treatments for both oncological and non oncological skin conditions. The Company uses a proprietary low energy X ray technology known as superficial radiation therapy ( SRT ), which is based on over a decade of dedicated research and development and has successfully incorporated SRT into a portfolio of treatment devices the SRT 100 TM , SRT 100+ TM and SRT 100 Vision TM . To date, SRT technology has been used to effectively and safely treat oncological and non oncological skin conditions in hundreds of thousands of patients around the world. With the introduction of Sculptura , the Company has branched out into cancer treatment that goes far beyond skin and may provide a revolutionary treatment option for patients around the world. The Company was organized in 2010 and completed its initial public offering in 2016. The Company operates as 1 segment from its corporate headquarters located in Boca Raton, Florida. For further information see Note 1, Description of the Business , in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in I, Item 8. Our Products and Services SRT 100 The SRT 100 is a photon x ray low energy superficial radiotherapy system that provides patients an alternative to surgery for treating non melanoma skin cancers, including basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers and other skin conditions such as keloids. The SRT 100 is especially effective in treating primary lesions that would otherwise be difficult or require extensive surgery involving sensitive areas of the head and neck regions, such as the fold in the nose, eyelids, lips, corner of the mouth, and the lining of the ear, that would otherwise lead to a less than desirable cosmetic outcome. Superficial radiation therapy treatment procedures do not require the use of anesthetics and eliminate the need for skin grafting. The Company believes that the SRT 100 provides healthcare providers and patients with a safe, virtually painless, and substantially non scarring treatment option for non melanoma skin cancer and other skin conditions, such as keloids. It allows dermatologists to retain non melanoma skin cancer patients, rather than referring them to specialists, while offering radiation oncologists an alternative to costly linear accelerator based treatments with a process that is less invasive, more time efficient, and improves practice economics. Revenue is primarily derived from sales of our SRT 100 product line. The SRT 100 provides the following clinical and functional advantages Easy touch automatic set up procedure, including automatic x ray tube warm up procedures; Specially designed control console for medical physicists and service technicians which provides integrated safety and back up timer controls, automatic system conditioning procedures, calibration, x ray output verification and system parameters, including last treatment status information; Advanced patient record management with integrated enterprise workflow management; Compact mobile design with a small 30 x 30 footprint and unique scissor x ray tube arm movements providing a large range of motion for patient access and treatment; and High reliability and MTBF ( mean time between failures ) performance that assure availability for the patients and practiti1rs and lower the total cost of ownership. 1 SRT 100 Vision The SRT 100 Vision provides customers with additional options compared to the SRT 100 base model. These additional options allow for dedicated treatment planning and full treatment progression documentation in a patient record. The SRT 100 Vision provides the user with a unique superficial radiation therapy tailored treatment planning application that integrates an embedded high frequency ultrasound imaging module, volumetric tumor analysis, beam margins planning, and comprehensive dosimetry parameters. This allows the user to precisely and more accurately plan and prescribe the patient specific treatment course to maximize patient outcomes and workflow efficiency. The SRT 100 Vision also offers a comprehensive control console and workflow management that provides full record and treatment tracing, operator level access and functional control, audio visual patient and treated lesion monitoring, and advanced dosimetry setting and tracing. SRT 100 Plus The SRT 100+ offers all the same features as the SRT 100, with the addition of An expanded energy range for customized, more precise treatment Remote diagnostics, including operation tracking New X ray tube with extended functionality and performance Advanced console and enhanced system mobility to optimize clinical practice Sculptura In February 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) allowed clearance of the Sculptura product, which is the Company proprietary modulated robotic brachytherapy radiation oncology system that provides targeted directional anisotropic radiation therapy ( ART ) and brachytherapy that uses patented Beam Sculpting capabilities to treat various cancers during surgery. This system has the potential to give surgeons and radiation oncologists at hospitals and cancer centers the ability to eliminate weeks of post operative radiation treatments that patients typically must undergo after surgery and also result in similar or better outcomes to current radiation treatments today, with significantly less collateral damage. Sculptura has the potential to revolutionize the quality of life associated with cancer treatment while achieving similar or lower mortality rates. Sculptura has several exclusive features, including 3D Beam Sculpting , respiratory motion tracking, embedded image guidance and treatment area illumination. Sentinel service program The Company offers the Sentinel service program, which provides customers comprehensive protection for their systems. The Sentinel service program covers all parts and labor for the period of the contract and 1 annual preventive maintenance session that includes cooling system maintenance, high voltage loop maintenance, filters and system cleaning, and system touch ups, should these be required during the preventative maintenance session. Sensus also provides turnkey pre and post sale services that include the following Providing a pre install kit for the contractors to prepare the treatment room; Room retrofit and shielding; System shipping coordination and installation; System commissioning by a medical physicist (through a national physics ne2rk); System registration with the state and daily workflow documentation preparation; Clinical applications training with the customer superficial radiation therapy staff; and Treating the first scheduled patients with our customers (onsite applications training). Sensus Laser Aesthetic Solutions (SLAS) In August 2020, the Company acquired 2 mobile aesthetic laser companies serving the State of Florida Aesthetic Mobile Laser Services, which serves Southeast and Southwest Florida; and Aesthetic Laser Partners, which serves Central and Northern Florida. The in office laser rental service provides an easy way for medical and health care professionals to offer aesthetic laser procedures without the long term financial commitment, maintenance, and obsolescence concerns associated with equipment ownership. Sensus Laser Aesthetic Solutions delivers a complete line of aesthetic lasers to dermatologists and clinicians around the state for a variety of treatments, both cosmetic and clinical. 2 Aesthetic Mobile Laser Services and Aesthetic Laser Partners each has been in business for more than 2 decades and both have a high level of customer trust and satisfaction. Together they have approximately 30 lasers and six vans, and service some 150+ dermatology practices in Florida al1, including more than 500 dermatologists who are not current Sensus customers. Their lasers facilitate a wide range of in office aesthetic dermatology procedures including facial rejuvenation, wrinkle removal, body sculpting fat removal as well as other aesthetic applications Consumables The Company sells disposable lead shielding replacements, disposable radiation safety Item, such as aprons and eye shields, ultrasound probe film, and disposable applicator tips, which are used to treat various sized lesions and different areas of the body. Competition The medical device industry is highly competitive and subject to rapid technological change and is significantly affected by new product introductions and market activities of other participants. Current marketed products, and any future products which the Company commercializes, will compete against healthcare providers who use other methods of treatment for the same disease or condition. In order to grow its business, Sensus must be able to compete effectively for market acceptance of its products. Key competitive factors include improved outcomes for medical conditions, acceptance by doctors treating non melanoma skin cancer and keloids, potential greater acceptance by the patient community, potential greater ease of use and reliability, product price and qualification for reimbursement, technical leadership and superiority, effective marketing and distribution, speed to market and the quality of its client service. Sales and Marketing The Company focus is mainly on 2 primary markets, private dermatology practices and radiation oncologists in both private and hospital settings. The Company currently employs a multi tier sales strategy to optimize geographic coverage and focus on its key markets. This multi tier sales model uses a direct sales force in the U.S., as well as international dealers and distributors. Sensus plans to continue selling and marketing the Company products to both the dermatology and radiation oncology markets concurrently. Dermatology Market Private dermatology practices in the U.S. represent the point of entry for most non melanoma skin cancer patients. The Company believes its SRT products offer dermatologists a competitive advantage by allowing them to retain patients for the treatment of non melanoma skin cancer, rather than having to refer them to other professionals. In addition to non melanoma skin cancers, the Company has an FDA clearance to treat Keloid scars since 2014. The Company SRT has been used by over 100 U.S. dermatology practices in the treatment of keloids. Since 2017, it is also being used to treat keloids in China. Radiation Oncology Market For licensed radiation oncologists in the U.S., the Company believes its SRT products offer a simpler, faster method of treatment with a better overall patient experience. SRT offers oncologists the ability to free up more expensive radiation equipment, such as linear accelerators, for more complex procedures while providing patients with effective, non invasive treatment options for non melanoma skin cancer. Sculptura has the potential to give surgeons and radiation oncologists at hospitals and cancer centers the ability to eliminate weeks of post operative radiation treatments that patients have to undergo after surgery and also result in similar or better outcomes to current radiation treatments today, with much less collateral damage. Sculptura has several exclusive features, including 3D Beam Sculpting and respiratory motion tracking to the embedded image guidance and treatment area illumination. 3 Other Markets Sensus believes that both plastic and general surgery markets as well as the laser aesthetic market present growth opportunities for many product offerings. With FDA clearance to treat keloids through SRT, plastic surgeons are recognizing the opportunity to be able to provide an effective treatment solution for this benign tumor. Additionally, the Company believes that plastic surgeons view the non melanoma skin cancer market as a growth opportunity that can supplement their existing services. Global Focus As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an installed base of 491 units in 18 countries, primarily in the United States. Customers include leading cancer centers, dermatology practices, hospitals and plastic surgery clinics, which further validates the targeted marketing approach led by the Company direct sales teams and global distribution partners. Manufacturing and Supply The Company currently uses third parties located in the U.S. to manufacture products. In 2010, the Company entered into a manufacturing agreement with RbM Services, LLC ( RbM ) pursuant to which RbM agreed to manufacture SRT 100 products. Under this agreement, the Company pays a fixed price per unit, subject to annual adjustments due to changes in the cost of materials. The agreement renews for successive 1 year periods unless either party notifies the other party in writing, at least 60 days prior to the anniversary date of the agreement, that it will not renew the agreement. The Company or manufacturer may terminate the agreement upon 90 days prior written notice. The Company maintains internal policies, procedures and supplier management processes designed to ensure that RbM meets applicable quality standards including FDA and International Organization for Standardization, or ISO, requirements. To date, Sensus has not experienced any difficulty in locating and obtaining the materials necessary to meet the demand for products, and believe manufacturing capacity is sufficient to meet global market demand for products for the foreseeable future. The Company believes this third party manufacturing relationship allows us to work with a supplier that has well developed specific competencies while minimizing our capital investment, controlling costs and shortening cycle times, all of which has allowed us to compete with our competitors. Sensus also works with other third parties that it believes could be relied upon if there were a need to change suppliers. The Company has a single preferred supplier for the x ray tubes and other major comp1nts used in its products. The Company also believes the preferred supplier has superior products; however, products of alternate suppliers would be adequate for Sensus products and therefore the Company does not anticipate any material disruptions to the supply of major comp1nts if there were a change in suppliers. Intellectual Property The Company actively seeks to protect the intellectual property that is important to our business, including seeking and maintaining patents that cover Sensus products. The Company also relies on trademarks to enhance, build and maintain the integrity of the Sensus brand. The Company is in the possession of several issued U.S. and Global patents. The patents pertain to technology that is pertinent to the Company. The following patents were issued between August 2007 and September 2008 U.S. Patent No. 7,372,940 Radiation therapy system with risk mitigation (expires September 30, 2025) U.S. Patent No. 7,263,170 Radiation therapy system featuring rotatable filter assembly (expires September 30, 2025) 4 The following patents were issued to us in 2018 Russia Patent No. 26333322 Hybrid Ultrasound Guided Superficial Radiotherapy System and Method China Patent No. ZL2013800134917 Hybrid Ultrasound Guided Superficial Radiotherapy System and Method The following patent was issued to Sensus in 2019 U.S. Patent No. 10,350,437 Robotic IORT X Ray Radiation System With Calibration Well (expires August 14, 2038) The following patents were issued to Sensus in 2020 U.S. Patent No. 10,596,392 Dermatology Radiotherapy System with hybrid Imager (expires July 28, 2038) U.S. Patent No. 10,607,802 3 dimensional beam forming X ray source (expires June 10, 2038) U.S. Patent No. 10,646,726 Robotic Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (expires June 19, 2038) Japan Patent No. 6754023 Robotic IORT X Ray Radiation System With Calibration Well (expires January 11, 2033) China Patent No. ZL201710929838.2 Hybrid Ultrasound Guided Superficial Radiotherapy System and Method (expires August 14, 2038) A total of 22 patent applications were pending at December 31, 2020 and additional patent applications are in process. The Company also owns seven U.S. trademark registrations (expiring from 2021 through 2031) and had 2 trademark applications pending as of December 31, 2020. The Company also relies on trade secrets and other unpatented proprietary rights to develop and maintain a competitive position. The Company seeks to protect unpatented proprietary rights through a variety of methods, including confidentiality agreements with employees, consultants and others who may have access to this proprietary information. The Company requires employees to execute invention assignment agreements with respect to inventions arising from their employment. The Company can provide no assurance that any patents or trademarks will be issued or registered as a result of our pending or future applications for such intellectual property. Even if any such patents or trademarks are ultimately issued or registered, they, or any of the Company other intellectual property, may not provide any meaningful protection or competitive advantage. Intellectual property could be challenged, invalidated, circumvented, infringed or misappropriated. In addition, third parties have claimed, and in the future may claim, that the Company, customers, licensees or other parties indemnified by Sensus are infringing upon their intellectual property rights. Government Regulation Sensus business is subject to extensive federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations, including those relating to the protection of the environment, health and safety. Some of the pertinent laws have not been definitively interpreted by the regulatory authorities or the courts, and their provisions are open to a variety of subjective interpretations. In addition, these laws and their interpretations are subject to change, and new laws may be enacted. Both federal and state governmental agencies continue to subject the healthcare industry to intense regulatory scrutiny, including heightened civil and criminal enforcement efforts. The Company believes that the business operations and relationships with our customers and suppliers are structured to comply with all applicable legal requirements. However, it is possible that governmental entities or other third parties could interpret these laws differently and assert otherwise. Discussed below are statutes and regulations that are most relevant to the Company business. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred approximately $13 million and $16 million, respectively, in expenses related to regulatory compliance and quality standards. 5 FDA Regulation of Medical Devices The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act ( FDCA ) and FDA regulations establish a comprehensive system for the regulation of medical devices intended for human use. Sensus medical device products are subject to these regulations, as well as other federal, state, and local laws and regulations. The FDA is also responsible for the overall enforcement of quality, regulatory and statutory requirements governing medical devices. FDA classifies medical devices into 1 of 3 classes Class I, Class II, or Class III depending on their level of risk and the types of controls that are necessary to assure device safety and effectiveness. The class assignment determines the type of premarketing submission or application, if any, that will be required before marketing in the U.S. The Company medical devices are Class II devices under the FDA classification system. Class II devices present a moderate risk and are devices for which general controls al1 are not sufficient to provide a reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness. Medical devices in Class II are subject to both general controls and special controls e.g., special labeling, compliance with industry standards, and postmarket surveillance. Unless exempted, Class II devices typically require FDA clearance before marketing, through the premarket notification (510(k)) process, in accordance with 21 CFR, Part 807 requirements. Unless it is exempt from premarket review requirements, a medical device must receive marketing authorization from the FDA prior to being commercially distributed in the U.S. The most common pathways for obtaining marketing authorization are 510(k) clearance and PMA. With the enactment of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act ( FDASIA ), the availability of a de novo pathway was facilitated for certain low to moderate risk devices that do not qualify for the 510(k) pathway due to the absence of a predicate device. 510(k) pathway As of December 31, 2020, all of our products were subject to or exempt from the 510(k) requirement. 3 510(k) clearances were issued to Sensus in 2019 for the Sculptura system and related comp1nts for the balloon applicator and treatment planning software. We have previously received FDA 510(k) clearances for our SRT 100, SRT 100 Vision, and SRT 100+ products. The Company has obtained all of its FDA clearances through the 510(k) pathway;, although other pathways are available, the Company believes they are less efficient and effective for the Company. Ongoing FDA regulation After a device is entered into commerce in the U.S., regardless of its classification or premarket pathway, numerous additional FDA requirements generally apply. These include Establishment registration and device listing requirements, in accordance with 21 CFR, Part 807; Quality System Regulation requirements, which govern the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the design, manufacture, packaging, labeling, storage, installation, and servicing of finished devices, in accordance with 21 CFR, Part 820; Labeling requirements, which mandate the inclusion of certain content in device labels and labeling, and which also prohibit the promotion of products for uncleared or unapproved, i.e., off label, uses; Medical Device Reporting regulation, which requires that manufacturers and importers report to FDA if their device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury or malfuncti1d in a way that would likely cause or contribute to a death or serious injury if it were to recur, in accordance with 21 CFR, Part 803; and Reports of Corrections and Removals regulation, which requires that manufacturers and importers report to FDA recalls (i.e., corrections or removals) if undertaken to reduce a risk to health posed by the device or to remedy a violation of the FDCA that may present a risk to health; manufacturers and importers must keep records of recalls that they determine to be not reportable, in accordance with 21 CFR, Part 806. 6 The FDA enforces these requirements by inspection and market surveillance. Failure to comply with applicable regulatory requirements can result in enforcement action by FDA, which may include, but is not limited to, the following sanctions Issuance of Form 483 observations during a facilities inspection; Untitled letters or warning letters; Fines, injunctions and civil penalties; Consent Decree, which forces improvements in the quality management system through the use of the federal courts; Recall or seizure of our products; Operating restrictions, partial suspension or total shutdown of production; Refusing our request for 510(k) clearance or premarket approval of new products; Withdrawing 510(k) clearance or premarket approvals that are already granted; and Criminal prosecution. The Company is subject to unannounced establishment inspections by the FDA, as well as other regulatory agencies overseeing the implementation of and compliance with applicable state public health regulations. These inspections may include our suppliers facilities. International International sales of medical devices are subject to foreign government regulations, which vary substantially from country to country. In order to market our products in other countries, the Company must obtain regulatory approvals and comply with safety and quality regulations. The time required to obtain approval by a foreign country may be longer or shorter than that required for FDA clearance or approval, and the requirements may differ. The European Union European Economic Area, or EU EEA, requires a CE conformity mark in order to market medical devices. The UK, due to Brexit, will also now require a separate clearance. Many other countries, such as Australia, India, New Zealand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, accept CE or FDA clearance or approval, although others, such as China, Brazil, Canada and Japan require separate regulatory filings. In the EU EEA, Sensus devices are required to comply with the essential requirements of the EU Medical Devices Directive (93 42 EEC). Compliance with these requirements entitles the Company to affix the CE marking of conformity to our medical devices, without which they cannot be commercialized in the EU EEA. To demonstrate compliance with the essential requirements and obtain the right to affix the CE marking of conformity the Company must undergo a conformity assessment procedure, which varies according to the type of medical device and its classification. Except for low risk medical devices (Class I), where the manufacturer can issue an EC Declaration of Conformity based on a self assessment of the conformity of its products with the essential requirements of the Medical Devices Directive, a conformity assessment procedure requires the intervention of a Notified Body, which is an organization accredited by a Member State of the EU EEA to conduct conformity assessments. The Notified Body would typically audit and examine the quality system for the manufacture, design and final inspection of our devices before issuing a certification demonstrating compliance with the essential requirements. Based on this certification we can draw up an EC Declaration of Conformity which allows us to affix the CE mark to our products. Further, the advertising and promotion of Sensus products in the EU EEA is subject to the laws of individual EEA Member States implementing the EU Medical Devices Directive, Directive 2006 114 EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising, and Directive 2005 29 EC on unfair commercial practices, as well as other EU EEA Member State laws governing the advertising and promotion of medical devices. These laws may limit or restrict the advertising and promotion of our products to the general public and may impose limitations on our promotional activities with healthcare professionals. The Company has obtained approval to sell our products in Australia, Canada, China, Europe, India, Israel, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, and Taiwan, and is currently seeking approval in several other countries. Sales and Marketing Commercial Compliance Federal anti kickback laws and regulations prohibit, among other things, persons from knowingly and willfully soliciting, receiving, offering or paying remuneration, directly or indirectly, in exchange for, or to induce either the referral of an individual, or the purchase, order or recommendation of, any good or service paid for under federal healthcare programs such as the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Possible sanctions for violation of these anti kickback laws include m1tary fines, civil and criminal penalties, exclusion from Medicare and Medicaid programs and forfeiture of amounts collected in violation of such prohibitions. 7 In addition, federal false claims laws prohibit any person from knowingly presenting, or causing to be presented, a false claim for payment to the federal government, or knowingly making, or causing to be made, a false statement to get a false claim paid. Off label promotion has been pursued as a violation of the federal false claims laws. Pursuant to FDA regulations, we can only market our products for cleared or approved uses. Although surgeons are permitted to use medical devices for indications other than those cleared or approved by FDA based on their medical judgment, we are prohibited from promoting products for such off label uses. Additionally, the majority of states in which we market our products have similar anti kickback, false claims, anti fee splitting and self referral laws, which may apply to Item or services reimbursed by any third party payor, including commercial insurers, and violations may result in substantial civil and criminal penalties. To enforce compliance with the federal laws, the U.S. Department of Justice, or DOJ, has increased its scrutiny of interactions between healthcare companies and healthcare providers which has led to an unprecedented level of investigations, prosecutions, convictions and settlements in the healthcare industry. Dealing with investigations can be time and resource consuming. Additionally, if a healthcare company settles an investigation with the DOJ or other law enforcement agencies, the company may be required to agree to additional compliance and reporting requirements as part of a consent decree or corporate integrity agreement. The U.S. and foreign government regulators have increased regulation, enforcement, inspections and governmental investigations of the medical device industry, including increased U.S. government oversight and enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Whenever a governmental authority concludes that we are not in compliance with applicable laws or regulations, that authority can impose fines, delay or suspend regulatory clearances, institute proceedings to detain or seize our products, issue a recall, impose operating restrictions, enjoin future violations and assess civil penalties against us or our officers or employees and can recommend criminal prosecution. Moreover, governmental authorities can ban or request the recall, repair, replacement or refund of the cost of devices we distribute. Additionally, the commercial compliance environment is continually evolving in the healthcare industry as some states, including California, Massachusetts and Vermont, mandate implementation of corporate compliance programs, along with the tracking and reporting of gifts, compensation and other remuneration to physicians. The Affordable Care Act also imposes reporting and disclosure requirements on device manufacturers for any transfer of value made or distributed to prescribers and other healthcare providers. Device manufacturers are also required to report and disclose any investment interests held by physicians and their family members during the preceding calendar year. Failure to submit required information may result in civil m1tary penalties of up to an aggregate of $150,000 per year (and up to an aggregate of $1 million per year for knowing failures ), for all payments, transfers of value or ownership or investment interests not reported in an annual submission. The shifting compliance environment and the need to build and maintain robust and expandable systems to comply in multiple jurisdictions with different compliance or reporting requirements increases the possibility that a healthcare company may run afoul of 1 or more of the requirements. 8 Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Healthcare fraud and abuse laws apply to Sensus business when a customer submits a claim for an item or service that is reimbursed under Medicare, Medicaid or most other federally funded healthcare programs. The federal Anti Kickback Statute prohibits unlawful inducements for the referral of business reimbursable under federally funded healthcare programs, such as remuneration provided to physicians to induce them to use certain tissue products or medical devices reimbursable by Medicare or Medicaid. The Anti Kickback Statute is subject to evolving interpretations. For example, the government has enforced the Anti Kickback Statute to reach large settlements with healthcare companies based on sham consultant arrangements with physicians. The majority of states also have anti kickback laws which establish similar prohibitions that may apply to Item or services reimbursed by any third party payor, including commercial insurers. Further, recently enacted amendments to the Affordable Care Act, among other things, amend the intent requirement of the federal anti kickback and criminal healthcare fraud statutes. A person or entity no longer needs to have actual knowledge of this statute or specific intent to violate it. In addition, the Affordable Care Act provides that the government may assert that a claim including Item or services resulting from a violation of the federal anti kickback statute constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for purposes of the false claims statutes. If a governmental authority were to conclude that we are not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, we and our officers and employees could be subject to severe criminal and civil penalties including, for example, exclusion from participation as a supplier of product to beneficiaries covered by Medicare or Medicaid. In addition to the Anti Kickback Statute, the federal physician self referral statute, commonly known as the Stark Law, prohibits physicians who have a financial relationship with an entity, including an investment, ownership or compensation relationship, from referring Medicare patients for designated health services, which include clinical pathology services, unless an exception applies. Similarly, entities may not bill Medicare or any other party for services furnished pursuant to a prohibited referral. Many states have their own self referral laws as well, which in some cases apply to all third party payors, not just Medicare and Medicaid. If a governmental authority were to conclude that we are not in compliance with the Stark Law or state self referral laws and regulations, our pathology laboratory business could be subject to severe financial consequences, including the obligation to refund amounts billed to third party payors in violation of such laws, civil penalties and potentially also exclusion from participation in government healthcare programs like Medicare and Medicaid. The Stark Law often is enforced through lawsuits brought under the Federal False Claims Act, violations of which trigger significant m1tary penalties and treble damages. Additionally, the civil False Claims Act prohibits knowingly presenting or causing the presentation of a false, fictitious or fraudulent claim for payment to the U.S. government. Actions under the False Claims Act may be brought by the Attorney General or as a qui tam action by a private individual in the name of the government. Violations of the False Claims Act can result in very significant m1tary penalties and treble damages. The federal government is using the False Claims Act, and the accompanying threat of significant liability, in its investigations of healthcare providers and suppliers throughout the country for a wide variety of Medicare billing practices, and has obtained multi million and multi billion dollar settlements in addition to individual criminal convictions. Given the significant size of actual and potential settlements, it is expected that the government will continue to devote substantial resources to investigating healthcare providers and suppliers compliance with the healthcare reimbursement rules and fraud and abuse laws. Health Information Privacy The federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, or HIPAA, as amended by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, or HITECH, and their respective implementing regulations, impose requirements on certain covered healthcare providers, health plans and healthcare clearinghouses, known as covered entities, as well as their business associates that perform services for them that involve individually identifiable health information. The HIPAA privacy and security regulations, including the expanded requirements under HITECH, establish comprehensive federal standards with respect to the use and disclosure of protected health information by covered entities and their business associates, in addition to setting standards to protect the confidentiality, integrity and security of protected health information. 9 The Company has implemented policies and procedures related to compliance with the HIPAA privacy and security regulations, as required by law. The privacy and security regulations establish a floor and do not supersede state laws that are more stringent. Therefore, we are required to comply with both federal privacy and security regulations and varying state privacy and security laws. In addition, for healthcare data transfers from other countries relating to citizens of those countries, the Company must comply with the laws of those other countries. The federal privacy regulations restrict the ability to use or disclose patient identifiable laboratory data, without patient authorization, for purposes other than payment, treatment or healthcare operations (as defined by HIPAA), except for disclosures for various public policy purposes and other permitted purposes outlined in the privacy regulations. HIPAA, as amended by HITECH, provides for significant fines and other penalties for wrongful use or disclosure of protected health information in violation of the privacy and security regulations, including potential civil and criminal fines and penalties. If the Company does not comply with existing or new laws and regulations related to protecting the privacy and security of health information, it could be subject to m1tary fines, civil penalties or criminal sanctions. In addition, other federal and state laws that protect the privacy and security of patient information may be subject to enforcement and interpretations by various governmental authorities and courts resulting in complex compliance issues. The Company could incur damages under state laws pursuant to an action brought by a private party for the wrongful use or disclosure of confidential health information or other private personal information. If the Company were to experience a breach of protected health information, it could be subject to significant adverse publicity in addition to possible enforcement sanctions and civil damages lawsuits. Finally, the Company may be required to incur additional costs related to ongoing HIPAA compliance as may be necessary to address evolving interpretations and enforcement of HIPAA and other health information privacy and security laws, the enactment of new laws or regulations, emerging cybersecurity threats and other factors. Research and Development Research and development costs related to development and quality and regulatory costs are expensed as incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred research and development expense of approximately $4.2 million and $6.4 million, respectively. Most of the increase in R&D spending in 2019 was related to the final development and production ramp up of Sculptura , a modulated robotic brachytherapy radiation oncology system that provides targeted directional anisotropic radiation therapy (ART) and brachytherapy, for which we filed a 510(k) application with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in December 2017 and received FDA clearance in February 2019. Employees and Human Capital At December 31, 2020, Sensus had 42 employees, including 38 in the U.S. and four in Israel. N1 of the Company employees are represented by a labor union or covered by a collective bargaining agreement. The Company believes that its success depends on the ability to attract, develop and retain key personnel. It also believes that the skills, experience and industry knowledge of its key employees significantly benefits its operations and performance. The Company believes that it offers competitive compensation and other means of attracting and retaining key personnel. Employee health and safety in the workplace is 1 of the Company core values. The COVID 19 pandemic has underscored for the Company the importance of keeping employees safe and healthy. In response to the COVID 19 pandemic, the Company has taken actions aligned with the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in an effort to protect the Company workforce so they can more safely and effectively perform their work. These actions include shutting down its headquarters for some months during 2020, providing facemasks to all employees, and allowing employees to work from home. Employee levels are managed to align with the pace of business and management believes it has sufficient human capital to operate its business successfully. Available Information Sensus files annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and all amendments to these reports and other information with the SEC. Sensus makes available free of charge, on or through its website at http www.sensushealthcare.com, the Company Annual Reports on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, proxy statements and all amendments to those filings, as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC . The information on the Company website is not incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Reports, proxy statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC, including Sensus filings, are also available to the public from the SEC website at http www.sec.gov. 10 Item 1A. RISK FACTORS An investment in Sensus common stock contains a high degree of risk. An investor should consider carefully the risks and uncertainties described below before making an investment decision. Sensus business could be harmed if any of these risks, as well as other risks not currently known or deem immaterial, could materialize. The trading price of Sensus common stock could decline due to the occurrence of any of these risks. These risks and uncertainties include the following Risks Related to our Business If third party payors do not provide coverage and adequate reimbursement for the use of our products, it is unlikely that our products will be widely used, and our revenue will be negatively impacted. In the U.S., the commercial success of Sensus existing products and any future products will depend, in part, on the extent to which governmental payors at the federal and state levels, including Medicare and Medicaid, private health insurers and other third party payors provide coverage for and establish adequate reimbursement levels for procedures using these products. Neither hospitals nor physicians are likely to use Sensus products if they do not receive adequate reimbursement payments for the procedures using these products. Some private payors in the U.S. may base their reimbursement policies on the coverage decisions determined by the Center of Medicare and Medical Services, or CMS, which administers the Medicare program and works in partnership with state governments to administer the Medicaid program. Others may adopt different coverage or reimbursement policies for procedures performed using Sensus products, while some governmental programs, such as Medicaid, have reimbursement policies that vary from state to state, some of which may not pay an amount that supports the selling price of Sensus products, if at all. A Medicare national or local coverage decision denying coverage for any of the procedures performed using the Company products could result in private and other third party payors also denying coverage. Medicare (Part B) and a number of private insurers in the U.S. currently cover and pay for both non melanoma skin cancer and keloid treatments using the SRT 100. A withdrawal, or even contemplation of a withdrawal, by CMS, Medicaid or private payors of reimbursements, or any other unfavorable coverage or reimbursement decisions by government programs or private payors, could have a material adverse effect on the Company business. Reimbursement systems in international markets vary significantly by country and by region within some countries, and reimbursement approvals must be obtained on a country by country basis. In many international markets, a product must be approved for reimbursement before it can be cleared for sale in that country. Further, many international markets have government managed healthcare systems that control reimbursement for new devices and procedures. In most markets there are private insurance systems as well as government managed systems. Sensus products may not be considered cost effective by international third party payors or governments managing healthcare systems. Furthermore, reimbursement may not be available or, if available, third party payors reimbursement policies may adversely affect the Company ability to sell products profitably. If sufficient coverage and reimbursement are not available for Sensus products, in either the U.S. or internationally, the demand for these products and, consequently, the Company revenues will be adversely affected. Our business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected by the effects of widespread public health epidemics, including COVID 19, that are beyond our control. Any outbreaks of contagious diseases, public health epidemics and other adverse public health developments in countries where we, our customers, or our suppliers operate could have a material and adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. The COVID 19 pandemic has impacted our sales as social distancing and related concerns forced physicians to temporarily close their practices in 2020 and is expected to continue to adversely impact our business, and the nature and extent of the impact is highly uncertain and beyond our control. Uncertain factors relating to COVID 19 include the duration, spread and severity of the virus, the effects of the COVID 19 pandemic on our customers, vendors and suppliers, and the actions or perception of actions that may be taken to contain or treat its impact, including declarations of states of emergency, business closures, manufacturing restrictions and a prolonged period of travel, commercial and or other similar restrictions and limitations. As a result of COVID 19 and the measures designed to contain its spread, our sales have been, and are expected to continue to be negatively impacted as a result of disruption in demand, which could have a material and adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Similarly, our suppliers may not have the materials, capacity, or capability to manufacture our products according to our schedule and specifications. If our suppliers operations are impacted, we may need to seek alternate suppliers, which may be more expensive, may not be available, or may result in delays in shipments to us and subsequently to our customers, each of which would affect our results of operations. The duration of the related financial impact to us, cannot be estimated at this time. Should such disruption continue for an extended period of time, the impact could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. 11 If our essential employees who are unable to telework become ill or otherwise incapacitated, our operations may be adversely impacted. Consistent with rapidly changing federal, state and local governmental orders and recommendations, we have implemented informal telework policies for appropriate categories of our employees. Employees that are unable to telework continue to work at our facilities, and we have implemented appropriate safety measures, including social distancing, face covering mandates, temperature checking, and increased sanitation standards in an attempt to maintain the health and safety of our workforce. We are following guidance from the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) regarding suspension of n1ssential travel, self isolation recommendations for employees returning from certain geographic areas, confirmed reports of any COVID 19 diagnosis among our employees, and the return of such employees to our workplace. Pursuant to updated guidance from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, we are engaging in limited and appropriate inquiries of employees regarding potential COVID 19 exposure, based on the direct threat that such exposure may present to our workforce. We continue to address other unique situations that arise among our workforce due to the COVID 19 pandemic on a case by case basis. While we believe that we have taken appropriate measures to ensure the health and wellbeing of our employees, there can be no assurances that our measures will be sufficient to protect our employees in our workplace or that they may not otherwise be exposed to COVID 19 outside of our workplace. If a number of our essential employees become ill, incapacitated or are otherwise unable to continue working during the current or any future epidemic, our operations may be adversely impacted. Substantially all of Sensus revenue is generated from the sale of the SRT 100 and related products, and any decline in the sales of these products or failure to gain market acceptance of these products will negatively impact the Company business, financial condition and results of operations. The Company is focused heavily on the development and commercialization of a limited number of products for the treatment of non melanoma skin cancer and other skin conditions with superficial radiotherapy. From the Company inception in 2010 through December 31, 2020, revenue has primarily been derived from sales of the SRT 100 product line and related services and ancillary products. Although Sensus has introduced new products, the Company expects most of revenue in 2021 to be derived from or related to sales of the SRT 100 product line. Sensus has a single preferred supplier for the x ray tubes and other major comp1nts used in the Company products and the loss of this preferred supplier could adversely affect the Company. Sensus has a single preferred supplier for the x ray tubes and other major comp1nts used in the Company products. Although other suppliers exist in the market, the Company believes that our preferred supplier products are of a superior quality. The loss of the preferred supplier, or the inability to supply the Company or third party manufacturer with adequate comp1nts could hinder the Company ability to effectively produce the Company products to meet existing demand levels, especially if Sensus were unable to timely procure them from other suppliers in the market, which could adversely affect the Company ability to commercialize products and increase revenues. The Company customers are concentrated in the U.S. and China (including 1 U.S. customer accounting for a significant portion of our sales), and economic difficulties or changes in the purchasing policies or patterns of the Company customers in these countries could have a significant impact on future business and operating results. Most of the Company sales have been made to customers located in the U.S. (91% and 93% in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively). For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 9% and 3%, respectively, of product sales were to Chinese customers and approximately 0% and 4%, respectively, were to Israeli customers. Additionally, a single customer in the U.S. accounted for approximately 39% and 68% of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Because of these geographic and customer concentrations, revenue could fluctuate significantly due to changes in economic conditions, competitive products, or the loss of, reduction of business with, or less favorable terms with, these countries or this customer. A reduction or delay in orders for the Company products from these countries and this customer could materially harm business and results of operations, including any adverse impact of the coronavirus epidemic 12 The Company operating results may vary significantly from quarter to quarter, which may negatively impact the value of its securities. Quarterly revenues and results of operations may fluctuate due to the following reasons, among others physician and hospital acceptance of our products; the timing, expense and results of research and development activities, and obtaining future regulatory approvals; fluctuations in expenses associated with expanding operations; the introduction of new products and technologies by competitors; sales representatives productivity; supplier, manufacturing or quality problems with products; the timing of stocking orders from distributors; changes in our pricing policies or in the pricing policies of competitors or suppliers; and changes in third party payors reimbursement policies. Because of these and other related or similar factors, it is likely that in some future period the Company operating results will not meet expectations. Failure to meet or exceed analyst expectations could cause a decrease in the trading price of the Sensus securities. Sensus may be required to obtain additional funds in the future, and these funds may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. Sensus operations have consumed substantial amounts of cash since inception. Sensus may need to seek additional capital, as the existing financial resources including our existing revolving line of credit, may not allow the Company to conduct all of the activities that would be beneficial for future growth. The Company may need to seek funds in the future. The Company existing revolving line of credit restricts the ability to incur certain indebtedness or permit certain encumbrances on assets without the prior written consent of the lender. If Sensus is unable to raise funds on favorable terms, or at all, the Company may not be able to support commercialization efforts, increase research and development activities, meet debt and other contractual obligations, and the growth of business may be negatively impacted. As a result, Sensus may be unable to compete effectively. The Company cash requirements in the future may be significantly different from current estimates and depend on many factors, including the results of commercialization efforts for products; the need for additional capital to fund development programs; the costs involved in obtaining and enforcing patents or any litigation by third parties regarding intellectual property; the establishment of high volume manufacturing and increased sales, marketing and distribution capabilities; and success in entering into collaborative relationships with other parties. 13 To the extent that Sensus raises additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of the existing stockholders will be diluted. Moreover, the terms of newly issued securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect common stockholders rights. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting ability to take specific actions such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring distributions or dividends. If Sensus raises additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, the Company may have to relinquish valuable rights to technologies, products or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable. Any of these events could adversely affect the ability to declare dividends on the Company common stock and to achieve future product development and commercialization goals and have a material adverse effect on business, financial condition and results of operations. Consolidation in the healthcare industry could adversely affect the Company future revenues and operating income. The medical technology industry has experienced a significant amount of consolidation, resulting in companies with greater market presence. Health care systems and other health care companies are also consolidating, resulting in greater purchasing power for the combined companies. As a result, the disruption in the healthcare industry caused by consolidation may lead to further competition among medical device suppliers to provide goods and services, which could adversely affect the Company future revenues and operating income. Risks Related to our Regulatory Environment Sensus is subject to various federal, state and foreign healthcare laws and regulations, and a finding of failure to comply with these laws and regulations could have a material adverse effect on its business. Sensus operations are, and will continue to be, directly and indirectly affected by various federal, state and foreign healthcare laws, including, but not limited to, those described below. Federal Anti Kickback Statute (42 U.S. Code 1320a 7b), which prohibits any person or entity from knowingly and willfully offering, paying, soliciting or receiving any remuneration, directly or indirectly, in cash or in kind, in return for or to induce the referring, ordering, leasing, purchasing or arranging for or recommending the referring, ordering, purchasing or leasing of any good, facility, item or service, for which payment may be made, in whole or in part, under federal healthcare programs, such as the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Federal Sunshine (42 U.S. Code 1320a 7h) law, which requires us to track and report annually to CMS information related to certain payments and other transfers of value provided to physicians (defined to include doctors, dentists, optometrists, podiatrists and chiropractors) and teaching hospitals and to report annually to CMS ownership and investment interests held by physicians, and their immediate family members. We are also subject to similar foreign sunshine laws or codes of conduct, which vary country by country. Federal civil and criminal false claims laws and civil m1tary penalty laws, which prohibit, among other things, persons or entities from knowingly presenting, or causing to be presented, a false or fraudulent claim to, or the knowing use of false records or statements to obtain payment from, or approval by, the federal government. Suits filed under the False Claims Act, known as qui tam actions, can be brought by any individual on behalf of the government and such individuals, commonly known as whistleblowers, may share in any amounts paid by the entity to the government in fines or settlement. When an entity is determined to have violated the False Claims Act (31 U.S. Code 3729 3733), it may be required to pay up to 3 times the actual damages sustained by the government, plus civil penalties for each separate false claim. Many of the physicians that use our products will file for reimbursement from governmental programs such as Medicare and Medicaid. As a result, we may be subject to the False Claims Act if we knowingly cause the filing of false claims. Federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, or HIPAA, statute, which, among other things, created federal criminal laws that prohibit knowingly and willfully executing, or attempting to execute, a scheme or artifice to defraud any healthcare benefit program and knowingly and willfully falsifying, concealing or covering up a material fact or making any materially false, fictitious or fraudulent statements in connection with the delivery of or payment for healthcare benefits, Item or services. Additionally, HIPAA, as amended by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009, and applicable implementing regulations, impose certain requirements relating to the privacy, security and transmission of individually identifiable health information without appropriate authorization on entities subject to the law, such as health plans, clearinghouses, and healthcare providers and their business associates. Internationally, substantially every jurisdiction in which we operate has established its own data security and privacy legal framework with which we must comply, including the Data Protection Directive 95 46 EC and national implementation of the Directive in the member states of the European Union. 14 Many states have also adopted laws similar to each of the above federal laws, such as anti kickback and false claims laws, which may be broader in scope and apply to Item or services reimbursed by any third party payor, including commercial insurers, as well as laws that restrict our marketing activities with healthcare professionals and entities, and require the Company to track and report payments and other transfers of value, including consulting fees, provided to healthcare professionals and entities. Some states mandate implementation of compliance programs to ensure compliance with these laws. Additionally, certain states require a certificate of need prior to the installation of a radiation device, such as the SRT 100. Sensus is also subject to foreign fraud and abuse laws, which vary by country. If the Company operations are found to be in violation of any of the laws described above or any other governmental regulations that apply now or in the future, Sensus may be subject to penalties, including administrative, civil and criminal penalties, damages, fines, disgorgement, individual imprisonment, contractual damages, reputational harm, exclusion from governmental healthcare programs, and the curtailment or restructuring of its operations. Any of the foregoing could adversely affect the Company ability to operate its business and financial results. Sensus is required to comply with medical device reporting requirements and must report certain malfunctions, deaths, and serious injuries associated with its products, which can result in voluntary corrective actions or agency enforcement actions. Under the U.S. Food and Drug Administration medical device reporting regulations (21 CFR 803), medical device manufacturers are required to submit information to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration when they receive a report or become aware that a device has or may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury or has or may have a malfunction that would likely cause or contribute to death or serious injury if the malfunction were to recur. All manufacturers placing medical devices on the market in the European Economic Area are legally bound to report any serious or potentially serious incidents involving devices they produce or sell (MEDDEV 212 1) to the Competent Authority in whose jurisdiction the incident occurred through the European Vigilance process. If an event subject to medical device reporting requirements occurs, Sensus will need to comply with the reporting requirements, which would adversely affect its reputation and subject the Company to actions by regulatory authorities, such as ordering recalls, imposing fines, or seizing the affected products. Furthermore, any corrective action, whether voluntary or involuntary, will require the dedication of time and capital and will distract management from business operations. Any of the foregoing would further harm the Company reputation and financial results. Healthcare policy changes may have a material adverse effect on Sensus business. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, included, among other things, a deductible 23% excise tax on any entity that manufactures or imports medical devices offered for sale in the U.S., with limited exceptions, effective January 1, 2013 This excise tax imposed a significant increase in the tax burden on the medical device industry. This excise tax was repealed in 2018. Other elements of this law, including comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, payment system reforms including shared savings pilots and other provisions, may significantly affect the payment for, and the availability of, healthcare services and may result in fundamental changes to federal healthcare reimbursement programs, any of which may materially affect numerous aspects of our business. Other healthcare reform measures may result in more rigorous coverage criteria and in additional downward pressure on the reimbursement received for procedures utilizing our products. In addition, other legislative changes have been proposed and adopted since the law discussed above was enacted that may adversely affect the Company revenues. Changes to existing laws may result in additional reductions in Medicare and other healthcare funding, which could have a material adverse effect on Sensus business and financial operations. Any reduction in reimbursement from Medicare or other government programs may result in a reduction in payments from private payors. The implementation of cost containment measures or other healthcare reforms may prevent the Company from being able to increase revenue, attain profitability, or commercialize its devices. In addition, other legislative changes may be enacted or existing regulations, guidance or interpretations may be changed, each of which may adversely affect operations. 15 Risks Related to our Intellectual Property If the Company patents and other intellectual property rights do not adequately protect its products, we may lose market share to competitors and be unable to operate business profitably. Sensus success significantly depends on its ability to protect proprietary rights to the technologies used in its products. The Company relies on 2 U.S. patents and 2 foreign patents, as well as a combination of copyright, trade secret and trademark laws, and nondisclosure, confidentiality and other contractual restrictions, to protect proprietary technology. The Company also has patent applications currently pending and in the process of being submitted. However, these legal means afford only limited protection and may not adequately protect its rights or permit Sensus to gain or keep any competitive advantage. For example, some or all of the pending patent applications or any future pending applications may be unsuccessful. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office may deny or require significant narrowing of claims in the pending patent applications or future patent applications, and patents issued as a result of these patent applications, if any, may not provide Sensus with significant commercial protection or be issued in a form that is advantageous. Sensus could also incur substantial costs in proceedings before the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. These proceedings could result in adverse decisions as to the priority of its inventions and the narrowing or invalidation of claims in its issued patents. Third parties may successfully challenge issued patents and those that may be issued in the future, which would render these patents invalid or unenforceable, which could limit the Company ability to stop competitors from marketing and selling related products. In addition, pending patent applications include claims to aspects of the Company products and procedures that are not currently protected by issued patents, and third parties may successfully patent those aspects before us or otherwise challenge Sensus rights to these aspects. Both the patent application process and the process of managing patent disputes can be time consuming and expensive. Competitors may be able to design around Sensus patents or develop products that provide outcomes that are comparable to the Company products. Although Sensus has entered into confidentiality agreements and intellectual property assignment agreements with certain of its employees, consultants and advisors in order to protect our intellectual property and other proprietary technology, these agreements may not be enforceable or may not provide meaningful protection for trade secrets or other proprietary information in the event of unauthorized use or disclosure or other breaches of the agreements. In addition, Sensus has not sought patent protection in all countries where it sells products. If Sensus fails to timely file a patent application in any such country or major market, Sensus may be precluded from doing so at a later date. Competitors may use the Company technologies in jurisdictions where Sensus has not obtained patent protection to develop their own products and, further, may export otherwise infringing products to territories in which Sensus has patent protection that may not be sufficient to terminate infringing activities. Furthermore, the laws of some foreign countries may not protect intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the U.S., if at all. In the event a competitor infringes upon 1 of the Company patents or other intellectual property rights, enforcing those patents and rights may be difficult and time consuming. Even if successful, litigation to defend these patents against challenges or to enforce Sensus intellectual property rights could be expensive and time consuming and could divert management attention. Moreover, the Company may not have sufficient resources to defend patents against challenges or to enforce intellectual property rights, any of which would adversely affect its ability to compete. If Sensus trademarks or trade names are not adequately protected, then the Company may be unable to build name recognition in markets of interest and business may be adversely affected. Sensus registered or unregistered trademarks or trade names may be challenged, infringed, circumvented or declared generic or determined to infringe other marks. Sensus may be unable to protect the rights to these trademarks and trade names, which the Company needs to build name recognition by potential partners or customers in markets of interest. If these trademarks are challenged, infringed upon, circumvented, or declared generic or infringing, or if the Company is unable to establish name recognition based on these trademarks and trade names, then it may be unable to compete effectively and the Company business may be adversely affected. 16 The medical device industry is characterized by extensive patent litigation, and if Sensus becomes subject to litigation, it could be costly, result in the diversion of management attention, require the Company to pay significant damages or royalty payments, or prevent the Company from marketing and selling existing or future products. The medical device industry is characterized by extensive litigation and administrative proceedings over patent and other intellectual property rights. Determining whether a product infringes a patent involves complex legal and factual issues, the determination of which is often uncertain. As the number of participants in the market for skin cancer and general oncology devices and treatments increases, the possibility of patent infringement claims against Sensus increases. Any infringement claims, litigation or other proceedings would place a significant strain on the Company financial resources, divert the attention of management from the core business and harm Sensus reputation. Adverse outcomes in litigation or similar proceedings could adversely impact business. Sensus may in the future be, named as a party to litigation or other similar legal proceedings. Adverse outcomes in any or all of these proceedings could result in m1tary damages or injunctive relief that could adversely affect its ability to continue conducting business. If an unfavorable final outcome in any such matter becomes probable and reasonably estimable, the Company financial condition could be materially and adversely affected. Risks Related to the Ownership of Sensus Securities We have a history of net losses. If we do not achieve profitability, our financial condition and the value of our common stock could suffer. Sensus has a history of net losses. The historical losses from inception through December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $219 million. The Company has significantly reduced its research and development expenses and is planning to continue to control these expenses as it competes the research and development of the final stages for the Sculptura. However, there can be no assurances that this and other actions will result in the Company profitability. Limited trading activity for shares of Sensus common stock may contribute to price volatility. While Sensus common stock are listed and traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market, there has been limited trading activity in the Company shares. Due to the limited trading activity of Sensus common stock, relativity small trades may have a significant impact on the price of these securities. The Company does not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, investors must rely on price appreciation of Sensus common stock for a return on its investment in the foreseeable future. The Company expects to retain any funds and future earnings to support the operation, growth and development of its business and does not anticipate paying any cash dividends on its common stock in the foreseeable future. As a result, a return on an investor investment in the near future will occur only if the Company share price appreciates. Sensus common stock price may not appreciate in value or maintain the price at which an investor purchased these securities, and in either case, may not realize a return on investment or could lose all or part of an investment in Sensus securities. Any future determination to declare cash dividends will be made at the discretion of Sensus Board of Directors and will be subject to compliance with applicable laws and covenants under any credit facilities, which may restrict or limit the Company ability to pay dividends. For example, the Company current revolving line of credit restricts the ability to pay dividends or make any distributions or payments or redeem, retire or purchase any capital stock without the prior written consent of the lender, provided that Sensus may pay dividends solely in common stock. Also, the form, frequency and amount of dividends will depend upon the Company future operations and earnings, capital requirements and surplus, general financial condition, contractual restrictions and other factors that the board of directors may deem relevant. Sensus may not pay dividends as a result of any of the foregoing, and in these cases, an investor would need to rely on price appreciation of Sensus common stock for a return on investment. 17 General stock market volatility could result in significant declines in the trading price of our securities, and an investor could lose all or a substantial part of an investment. Stock markets have experienced extreme volatility that has often been unrelated to the operating performance of particular companies. These broad market fluctuations may adversely affect the trading price of our securities. In addition, limited trading volume of Sensus securities may contribute to its future volatility. Price declines in Sensus securities could result from general market and economic conditions, some of which are beyond the Company control, and a variety of other factors, including any of the risk factors described in this Annual Report on Form 10 K. These broad market and industry factors may harm the market price of Sensus securities, regardless of the Company operating performance, and could cause an investor to lose all or part of an investment in Sensus securities since an investor might be unable to sell these securities at or above the price paid. Factors that could cause fluctuations in the market price of Sensus securities include the following price and volume fluctuations in the overall stock market from time to time; volatility in the market prices and trading volumes of medical device company stocks; changes in operating performance and stock market valuations of other medical device companies generally, or those in our industry in particular; sales of Sensus securities by the Company or stockholders; failure of securities analysts to initiate or maintain coverage of the Company, changes in financial estimates by securities analysts who follow Sensus or our failure to meet these estimates or the expectations of investors; the financial projections the Company may provide to the public, any changes in those projections or failure to meet those projections; rumors and market speculation involving Sensus or other companies in the industry; actual or anticipated changes in the Company results of operations or fluctuations in results of operations; actual or anticipated developments in the Company business, our competitors businesses or the competitive landscape generally; litigation involving Sensus, our industry or both, or investigations by regulators into the Company operations or those of our competitors; developments or disputes concerning Sensus intellectual property or other proprietary rights; announced or completed acquisitions of businesses or technologies by the Company or our competitors; new laws or regulations or new interpretations of existing laws or regulations applicable to the business; changes in accounting standards, policies, guidelines, interpretations or principles; any significant change in the Company management; and general economic conditions and slow or negative growth of the Company markets. In addition, in the past, following periods of volatility in the overall market and the market price of a particular company securities, securities class action litigation has often been instituted against these companies. This litigation, if instituted against Sensus, could result in substantial costs and a diversion of management attention and resources. Sensus is both an emerging growth company and a smaller reporting company, and the reduced reporting requirements applicable to emerging growth companies and smaller reporting companies may make the Company common stock less attractive to investors. Sensus is an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act. As such,the Company can take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies but not to emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to being permitted to provide only 2 years of audited financial statements, in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements, with correspondingly reduced Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations disclosure; not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements in the assessment of the Company internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act; 18 reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in the Company periodic reports and proxy statements; and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. Sensus is expected to remain an emerging growth company until December 31, 2021, following which it would continue to be a smaller reporting company, which will enable it to continue to take advantage of many of these exemptions, as discussed below. Investors may find Sensus common stock less attractive if the Company chooses to rely on these exemptions. If some investors find Sensus common stock less attractive as a result of any choices to reduce future disclosure, there may be a less active trading market for the Company common stock and the price of its common stock may be more volatile. Sensus is also a smaller reporting company, meaning that its public float the outstanding common stock held by nonaffiliates had a value of less than $250 million at the end of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter. Thus, even if the Company is no longer an emerging growth company, as a smaller reporting company, the Company could take advantage of certain reduced governance and disclosure requirements, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements in the assessment of the Company internal control over financial reporting. As a result, investors and others may be less comfortable with the effectiveness of Sensus internal controls and the risk that material weaknesses or other deficiencies in internal controls go undetected may increase. In addition, as a smaller reporting company, Sensus takes advantage of the ability to provide certain other less comprehensive disclosures in our SEC filings, including, among other things, providing only 2 years of audited financial statements in annual reports and simplified executive compensation disclosures. Consequently, it may be more challenging for investors to analyze the Company results of operations and financial prospects, as the information provided to stockholders may be different from what 1 might receive from other public companies in which 1 holds shares. Sensus executive officers and directors may exert control over the Company and may exercise influence over matters subject to stockholder approval. Sensus executive officers and directors, together with their respective affiliates, beneficially owned approximately 19% of our outstanding common stock as of February 8, 2021 Accordingly, these stockholders, if they act together, may exercise substantial influence over matters requiring stockholder approval, including the election of directors and approval of corporate transactions, such as a merger. This concentration of ownership could have the effect of delaying or preventing a change in control or otherwise discourage a potential acquirer from attempting to obtain control over the Company, which in turn could have a material adverse effect on the market value of Sensus common stock. If securities or industry analysts do not publish research or publish unfavorable or inaccurate research about Sensus business, the price of the Company securities and trading volume could decline. The trading market for Sensus securities depends, in part, on the research and reports that securities or industry analysts publish about the Company or business. Sensus may be unable to attract or sustain coverage by well regarded securities and industry analysts. If either n1 or only a limited number of securities or industry analysts cover the Company, or if these securities or industry analysts are not widely respected within the general investment community, the trading price for Sensus securities would be materially and negatively impacted. In the event the Company obtains securities or industry analyst coverage, if 1 or more of the analysts who cover Sensus downgrades the securities or publish inaccurate or unfavorable research about the Company, the price of Sensus securities would likely decline. If 1 or more of these analysts cease coverage of Sensus, or fail to publish reports on the Company regularly, demand for the Company securities could decrease, which might cause the price of its securities and trading volume to decline. 19 Sensus certificate of incorporation, bylaws and Delaware law contain provisions that could discourage another company from acquiring the Company and may prevent attempts by the Company stockholders to replace or remove the current directors and management. Provisions of the General Corporation Law of Delaware (where the Company is incorporated), and the Company certificate of incorporation and bylaws may discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition that stockholders may consider favorable, including transactions in which an investor might otherwise receive a premium for its stock. In addition, these provisions may frustrate or prevent any attempts by the Company stockholders to replace or remove the current management by making it more difficult for stockholders to replace or remove the Company board of directors. These provisions include authorizing the issuance of blank check preferred stock without any need for action by stockholders; requiring supermajority stockholder voting to effect any merger or sale of all or substantially all of the Company stock and assets; eliminating the ability of stockholders to call and bring business before special meetings of stockholders; prohibiting stockholder action by written consent; establishing advance notice requirements for nominations for election to the Board of Directors or for proposing matters that can be acted on by stockholders at stockholder meetings; dividing the Company Board of Directors into 3 classes so that only 1 third of the directors will be up for election in any given year; and providing that the Company directors may be removed only by the affirmative vote of at least 75% of Sensus then outstanding common stock and only for cause. In addition, Sensus is subject to Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, which may have an anti takeover effect with respect to transactions not approved in advance by the Board of Directors, including discouraging takeover attempts that could result in a premium over the market price for shares of the Company common stock. These provisions will apply even if a takeover offer may be considered beneficial by some stockholders and could delay or prevent an acquisition that the Company Board of Directors determines is not in the best interests of Sensus and its stockholders and could also affect the price that some investors are willing to pay for Sensus common stock. Sensus certificate of incorporation provides that the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware is the exclusive forum for substantially all disputes between the Company and its stockholders, which could limit stockholders ability to obtain a favorable judicial forum for disputes with the Company or its directors, officers or employees. Sensus certificate of incorporation provides that, unless the Company consent in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware is the exclusive forum for any derivative action or proceeding brought on behalf of the Company; any action asserting a breach of fiduciary duty; any action asserting a claim against the Company arising pursuant to the Delaware General Corporation Law, the Company certificate of incorporation or bylaws; or any action asserting a claim against the Company that is governed by the internal affairs doctrine. This choice of forum provision may limit a stockholder ability to bring a claim in a judicial forum that it finds favorable for disputes with the Company or its directors, officers or other employees, which may discourage these lawsuits against the Company and its directors, officers and other employees. If a court were to find the choice of forum provision contained in the Company certificate of incorporation to be inapplicable or unenforceable in an action, Sensus may incur additional costs associated with resolving the action in other jurisdictions, which could harm business and financial condition. If Sensus fails to maintain proper and effective internal controls, the Company ability to produce accurate and timely financial statements could be impaired and investors views of the Company or its business could be harmed, resulting in a decrease in value of the Company common stock. As a public company, Sensus is required to maintain internal control over financial reporting and to report any material weaknesses in the Company internal controls. In addition, the Company is required to furnish a report by management on the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act. In addition, the Company independent registered public accounting firm will be required to attest to the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting beginning with the Company annual report on Form 10 K following the date on which Sensus is no longer an emerging growth company or the date Sensus no longer qualifies as a smaller reporting company. Compliance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act will require the Company to incur substantial accounting expense and expend significant management efforts. If Sensus is unable to comply with the requirements of Section 404 in a timely manner, or the Company and the independent registered public accounting firm identify deficiencies in the internal control over financial reporting that are deemed to be material weaknesses, the market price of Sensus common stock could decline and the Company could be subject to sanctions or investigations by Nasdaq, the SEC or other regulatory authorities, which would require additional financial and management resources. 20 The Company operations may be impaired if information technology systems fail to perform adequately or if are the subject of a data breach or cyberattack. The Company information technology systems are critically important to operating business efficiently. Sensus relies on information technology systems to manage business data, communications, employee information, and other business processes. The Company outsources certain business process functions to third party providers and similarly relies on these third parties to maintain and store confidential information on their systems. The failure of these information technology systems to perform as the Company anticipates could disrupt business and could result in transaction errors, processing inefficiencies, and the loss of sales and customers, causing business and results of operations to suffer. Although Sensus protects our information technology systems, Sensus has experienced varying degrees of cyber incidents in the normal conduct of business, including viruses, worms, phishing and other malicious activities. Although there have been no serious consequences to date, such breaches could result in unauthorized access to information including customer, supplier, employee, or other company confidential data. Sensus carries insurance against these risks, perform penetration tests from time to time, and design business processes to attempt to mitigate the risk of such breaches. However, the Company efforts to mitigate these risks may be unsuccessful for security breaches not to occur. Moreover, the development and maintenance of these measures requires continuous monitoring as technologies change and efforts to overcome security measures evolve. The Company has experienced, and expect to continue to experience, cyber security threats and incidents, n1 of which has been material to Sensus to date. However, a successful breach or attack could have a material negative impact on operations and subject the Company to consequences such as direct costs associated with incident response. Item 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS The Company has no unresolved comments from the SEC staff relating to Sensus periodic or current reports filed with the SEC pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
