CIK: 1625101
Company Name: PULSE BIOSCIENCES INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2021-03-12
Accession Number: 0001625101-21-000014


Item 1 Business In light of the significant risks and uncertainties to which our forward looking statements are subject, you should not place undue reliance on or regard these statements as a representation or warranty by us or any other person that we will achieve our objectives and plans in any specified timeframe, or at all. We discuss many of these risks and uncertainties in greater detail in this Annual Report, particularly in . Item 1A. Risk Factors. These forward looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Annual Report regardless of the time of delivery of this Annual Report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise after the date of this Annual Report. We have based the forward looking statements contained in this Annual Report primarily on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects. These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. You should read this Annual Report and the documents that we reference elsewhere in this Annual Report completely and with the understanding that our actual results may differ materially from what we expect as expressed or implied by our forward looking statements. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance or condition and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance, or achievement to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward looking statements. New risks and uncertainties emerge from time to time and it is not possible for us to predict all risks and uncertainties that could have an impact on the forward looking statements contained in this Annual Report. This Annual Report on Form 10 K, or Annual Report, contains certain forward looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. In some cases, you can identify forward looking statements by the following words may, will, could, would, should, expect, intend, plan, anticipate, believe, estimate, predict, project, potential, continue, ongoing or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, although not all forward looking statements contain these words. SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS Table of Contents 2 85 Signatures 84 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 81 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 80 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 80 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 80 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 80 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 80 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 79 Other Information Item 9B. 79 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 79 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 57 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 56 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 49 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 49 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 47 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 46 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 46 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 46 Item 2 Properties
