CIK: 1625101
Company Name: PULSE BIOSCIENCES INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2018-03-16
Accession Number: 0001625101-18-000012


Item 1 Business In this Annual Report on Form 10 K, references to Pulse, Pulse Biosciences, we, us, our and the Company refer to Pulse Biosciences, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, unless expressly indicated or the context otherwise requires. You should read this Annual Report and the documents that we reference elsewhere in this Annual Report completely and with the understanding that our actual results may differ materially from what we expect as expressed or implied by our forward looking statements. In light of the significant risks and uncertainties to which our forward looking statements are subject, you should not place undue reliance on or regard these statements as a representation or warranty by us or any other person that we will achieve our objectives and plans in any specified timeframe, or at all. We discuss many of these risks and uncertainties in greater detail in this Annual Report, particularly in . Item 1A. Risk Factors. These forward looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Annual Report regardless of the time of delivery of this Annual Report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise after the date of this Annual Report. This Annual Report on Form 10 K, or Annual Report, contains forward looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. In some cases, you can identify forward looking statements by the following words may, will, could, would, should, expect, intend, plan, anticipate, believe, estimate, predict, project, potential, continue, ongoing or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, although not all forward looking statements contain these words. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance or condition and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievement to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward looking statements. OUT FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS SPECIAL NOTE AB Table of Contents 2 87 Signatures 86 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 83 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 82 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 82 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 82 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 82 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 82 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 81 Other Information Item 9B. 80 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 80 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 58 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 57 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 48 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 47 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 44 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 43 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 43 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 43 Item 2 Properties
