CIK: 1640266
Company Name: VOYAGER THERAPEUTICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2018-03-14
Accession Number: 0001558370-18-002038


ITEM 1 BUSINESS I PART You should read this Annual Report on Form 10 K and the documents that we have filed as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10 K with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law. These forward looking statements are only predictions and we may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on our forward looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward looking statements we make. We have based these forward looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition and operating results. We have included important factors in the cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, particularly in , Item 1A Risk Factors that could cause actual future results or events to differ materially from the forward looking statements that we make. Our forward looking statements do not reflect the potential impact of any future acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or investments we may make. our ability to enter into future collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements. our ability to sustain consistency with recently announced results from our ongoing Phase 1b clinical trial in future clinical trials; and the impact of government laws and regulations including in the United States, the European Union, and other important geographies such as Japan; our competitive position and the success of competing products that are or become available for the indications that we are pursuing; Table of Contents 3 our plans and ability to raise additional capital, including through equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and licensing arrangements; our strategic collaborations with Sanofi Genzyme and AbbVie, including the possibility and timing of each exercising options to certain of our programs as specified in the applicable collaboration agreements; the rate and degree of market acceptance of our product candidates for any indication once approved; our estimates regarding the size of the potential markets for our product candidates and our ability to serve those markets; our intellectual property position and our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our proprietary assets; our ability to access, develop, and obtain regulatory clearance for devices to deliver our AAV gene therapies to critical targets of neurological disease; our ability to develop a manufacturing capability compliant with current good manufacturing practices for our product candidates; our ability to continue to develop our product engine; our estimates regarding expenses, future revenues, capital requirements, and needs for additional financing; the timing of and our ability to submit applications for, and obtain and maintain regulatory approvals for our product candidates, including our ability to file Investigational New Drug applications, or INDs, for our programs for the treatment of a monogenic form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, VY HTT01 for the treatment of Huntington disease, and VY FXN01 for the treatment of Friedreich ataxia; formulation changes to our product candidates may require us to conduct additional clinical studies to bridge our modified product candidates to earlier versions; our ongoing and planned clinical trials and related timelines, including our ability to continue to advance VY AADC through the current Phase 1b clinical trial and into a planned pivotal Phase 2 3 clinical program as a treatment for advanced Parkinson disease, and our preclinical development efforts and studies; our ability to identify and optimize product candidates and novel AAV gene therapy capsids; our plans to develop and commercialize our product candidates based on adeno associated virus, or AAV, gene therapy; The words anticipate, believe, estimate, expect, intend, may, might, plan, predict, project, target, potential, contemplate, anticipate, goals, will, would, could, should, continue, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements, although not all forward looking statements contain these identifying words. These forward looking statements include, among other things, statements about This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains forward looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, including statements regarding our strategy, future operations, future financial position, future revenue, projected costs, prospects, plans, objectives of management and expected market growth, are forward looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other important factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward looking statements. Forward Looking Statements Table of Contents 2 F 34 Signatures 132 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 132 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V. 131 Principal Accountant Fees and Services Item 14. 131 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 131 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 131 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 131 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II. 131 Other Information Item 9B. 130 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 130 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 130 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 129 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 112 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 110 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 109 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I. 109 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 108 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 108 Item 2 Properties
