CIK: 1640266
Company Name: VOYAGER THERAPEUTICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2017-03-15
Accession Number: 0001558370-17-001797


ITEM 1 BUSINESS I PART You should read this Annual Report on Form 10 K and the documents that we have filed as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10 K with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law. and operating results. We have included important factors in the cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, particularly in , Item 1A. Risk Factors that could cause actual future results or events to differ materially from the forward looking statements that we make. Our forward looking statements do not reflect the potential impact of any future acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or investments we may make. Table of Contents 3 These forward looking statements are only predictions and we may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward looking statements, so you should not place undue reliance on our forward looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward looking statements we make. We have based these forward looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition the success of competing products that are or become available for the indications that we are pursuing. our ability to obtain additional financing when needed; and the rate and degree of market acceptance of our product candidates for any indication once approved; the size of the potential markets for our product candidates and our ability to serve those markets; our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our proprietary assets; regulatory developments in the United States and the European Union and other important geographies such as Japan; our ability to access or develop devices to deliver our AAV gene therapies to discrete regions of the CNS; our ability to develop a manufacturing capability compliant with current good manufacturing practices for our product candidates; our ability to continue to develop our product engine; the accuracy of our estimates regarding expenses, future revenues and capital requirements; our ability to file an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, for our VY SOD101 program for a monogenic form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in late 2017, and file INDs for 2 other of our preclinical programs in the next 24 months; our ability to advance our other programs through preclinical development and into clinical trials, and successfully complete such clinical trials; our ability to continue to advance VY AADC01 through the current Phase 1b clinical trial as a treatment for advanced Parkinson disease and advance VY AADC02 into later stage clinical trials; The words anticipate, believe, estimate, expect, intend, may, plan, predict, project, target, potential, will, would, could, should, continue, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements, although not all forward looking statements contain these identifying words. These forward looking statements include, among other things, statements about This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains forward looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, including statements regarding our strategy, future operations, future financial position, future revenue, projected costs, prospects, plans, objectives of management and expected market growth, are forward looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other important factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward looking statements. Forward Looking Statements Table of Contents 2 F 33 Signatures 111 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 111 Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V. 110 Principal Accountant Fees and Services Item 14. 110 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence Item 13 110 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 110 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 110 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II. 110 Other Information Item 9B. 109 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 109 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 109 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 108 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 93 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 91 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 89 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I. 89 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 89 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 89 Item 2 Properties
