CIK: 1625101
Company Name: PULSE BIOSCIENCES INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2022-03-31
Accession Number: 0001625101-22-000016


Item 1 Business In addition, statements that we believe and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report, and although we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted a thorough inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain and investors are cauti1d not to unduly rely upon these statements. This Annual Report and any documents incorporated by reference may contain market data that we obtain from industry sources. These sources do not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of the information. Although we believe that our industry sources are reliable, we do not independently verify the information. The market data may include projections that are based on a number of other projections. While we believe these assumptions to be reasonable and sound as of the date of this Annual Report, actual results may differ from the projections. This Annual Report on Form 10 K ( Annual Report ) contains forward looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ). Forward looking statements relate to expectations concerning matters that are not historical facts. Words such as anticipates, believes, could, estimates, expects, intends, may, might, plans, projects, will, would, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements, although not all forward looking statements contain these identifying words. These forward looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements related to our expected business, new product introductions, results of clinical studies, expectations regarding regulatory clearance and the timing of FDA or non US filings or approvals including meetings with FDA or non US regulatory bodies, procedures and procedure adoption, future results of operations, future financial position, our ability to generate revenues, our financing plans and future capital requirements, anticipated costs of revenue, anticipated expenses, the effect of recent accounting pronouncements, our investments, anticipated cash flows, our ability to finance operations from cash flows and similar matters, the impact of the recent COVID 19 coronavirus pandemic and related public health measures on our business, and statements based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts, and projections about the economies and markets in which we intend to operate and our beliefs and assumptions regarding these economies and markets. We may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward looking statements and you should not place undue reliance on our forward looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward looking statements that we make. You should read the Risk Factors section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward looking statements contained herein. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward looking statements. SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS Table of Contents 2 Unless expressly indicated or the context requires otherwise, the terms Pulse, Company, we, us, and our, in this document refer to Pulse Biosciences, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and, where appropriate, its wholly owned subsidiaries. symbols, but we will assert, to the fullest extent under applicable law, our rights to our trademarks and trade names. Also, this Annual Report may contain additional trade names, trademarks or service marks of others, which are the property of their respective owners. We do not intend our use or display of any other company trade names, trademarks or service marks to imply a relationship with, or endorsement or sponsorship of us by, any of these other companies. TM and Pulse Biosciences, the Pulse logos and other trademarks or service marks that we use in connection with the operation of our business appearing in this Annual Report, including CellFX, CellFX CloudConnect, CellFX Marketplace, Nano pulse Stimulation, and NPS, are the property of Pulse Biosciences, Inc. Solely for your convenience, some of our trademarks and trade names referred to in this Annual Report are listed without the 99 Signatures 98 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 95 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 94 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 94 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 94 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 94 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 94 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 94 Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections Item 9C. 93 Other Information Item 9B. 93 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 93 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 64 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 63 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 54 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 54 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 52 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 51 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 51 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 51 Item 2 Properties
