CIK: 1640266
Company Name: VOYAGER THERAPEUTICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2022-03-08
Accession Number: 0001558370-22-003015


ITEM 1 BUSINESS I PART Table of Contents 5 tbreak of an illness or other health issue could significantly disrupt our operations. The current COVID 19 pandemic and the response to it have had, and we expect they will continue to have, an adverse effect on our business, operations, and future results. A widespread ou In 2021, we reduced the size of our organization in connection with a strategic restructuring, and we may encounter difficulties in managing our business as a result of this restructuring or as a result of the attrition that has occurred or may in the future occur due to this restructuring. In addition, we may not achieve anticipated benefits and savings from the reduction. Our future success depends on our ability to retain key members of our management team, and to attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. Our inability to recruit, or the loss of services of certain executives, key employees, consultants or advisors, may impede the progress of our research, development and commercialization objectives and could harm our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. If we are unable to obtain and maintain patent protection for our products and technology, or if the scope of the patent protection obtained is not sufficiently broad, our competitors could develop and commercialize products and technology similar or identical to ours, and our ability to successfully commercialize our products and technology may be adversely affected. Our gene therapy approach utilizes vectors derived from viruses, which may be perceived as unsafe or may result in unforeseen adverse events. Negative public opinion and increased regulatory scrutiny of gene therapy may damage public perception of the safety of our product candidates and adversely affect our ability to conduct our business or obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates. Gene therapies are novel, complex and difficult to manufacture. We could experience manufacturing problems that result in delays in the development or commercialization of our product candidates or otherwise harm our business. We face significant competition in an environment of rapid technological change and the possibility that our competitors may achieve regulatory approval before us or develop therapies that are more advanced or effective than ours, which may harm our business and financial condition and our ability to successfully market or commercialize our product candidates. Our product candidates or the process for administering our product candidates may cause undesirable side effects or have other properties that could delay or prevent their regulatory approval, limit their commercial potential or result in significant negative consequences following any potential marketing approval. We are early in our development efforts. Our product candidates are in the discovery and preclinical development stages. We may encounter substantial delays or difficulties in commencement, enrollment or completion of our preclinical studies or clinical trials, or may fail to demonstrate safety and efficacy to the satisfaction of applicable regulatory authorities, which could prevent us from commercializing our current and future product candidates on a timely basis, if at all. Regulatory requirements governing gene and cell therapy products have changed frequently and may continue to change in the future. Such requirements may lengthen the regulatory review process, require us to modify current studies or perform additional studies or increase our development costs, which in turn may force us to delay, limit, or terminate certain of our programs. duration and cost of development of, and of subsequently obtaining regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Table of Contents 4 Our AAV gene therapy product candidates are based on a proprietary technology and, in several disease areas, unvalidated treatment approaches, which makes it difficult and potentially infeasible to predict the To date, all of our revenue has been derived from our prior collaborations with Sanofi Genzyme Corporation, AbbVie Biotechnology Ltd and AbbVie Ireland Unlimited Company, our ongoing collaboration with Neurocrine, the Pfizer License Agreement, and the Novartis License Agreement. If any ongoing or future collaboration or licensing agreements were to be terminated, our business financial condition, results of operations and prospects could be harmed. We will need to raise additional funding, which may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Failure to obtain this necessary capital when needed may force us to delay, limit or terminate certain of our product development efforts or other oper ations. We have a history of incurring significant losses and anticipate that we will incur losses for the foreseeable future and may never achieve or maintain consistent profitability. We may not be able to generate sufficient revenue from the commercialization of our product candidates and may never be consistently profitable. Investment in our securities involves risk and uncertainties that you should be aware of when evaluating our business. The following is a summary of what we believe to be the principal risks facing our business, as more fully described under , Item 1A Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10 K. The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only risks and uncertainties we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we presently deem less significant may also impair our business operations. RISK FACTOR SUMMARY You should read this Annual Report on Form 10 K and the documents that we have filed as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10 K with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law. These forward looking statements are only predictions and we may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on our forward looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward looking statements we make. We have based these forward looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition and operating results. We have included important factors in the cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, particularly in , Item 1A Risk Factors that could cause actual future results or events to differ materially from the forward looking statements that we make. Our forward looking statements do not reflect the potential impact of any future acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or investments we may make. the potential impact of the coronavirus disease, or COVID 19, pandemic on future clinical trials and other business operations. our ability to reduce costs and reprioritize our product candidate pipeline successfully in connection with our strategic initiatives; and our ability to enter into future collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements; the impact of government laws and regulations including in the United States, the European Union, and other important geographies such as Japan; our competitive position and the success of competing products that are or become available for the indications that we are pursuing; Table of Contents 3 our plans and ability to raise additional capital, including through equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and licensing arrangements; the rate and degree of market acceptance of our product candidates for any indication once approved; our estimates regarding the size of the potential markets for our product candidates and our ability to serve those markets; our intellectual property position and our ability to obtain, maintain and enforce intellectual property protection for our proprietary assets; our ability to access, develop, and obtain regulatory clearance for devices to deliver our AAV gene therapies to critical targets of neurological disease when necessitated by or advantageous to our development efforts; our ability to conduct clinical trials compliant with current good clinical practices and to develop a manufacturing capability compliant with current good manufacturing practices for our product candidates; our estimates regarding expenses, future revenues, capital requirements, and needs for additional financing; the timing of and our ability to submit applications and obtain and maintain regulatory approvals for our product candidates, including the ability to file IND applications for our programs; formulation changes to our product candidates that may require us to conduct additional preclinical studies to bridge our modified product candidates to earlier versions; our ongoing and planned preclinical development efforts, related timelines and studies; our strategic collaboration with and funding from our collaboration partner Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., or Neurocrine, and from our licensing arrangements with Pfizer Inc., or Pfizer, and Novartis Pharma AG, or Novartis; our ability to identify and optimize product candidates and proprietary AAV capsids; discovery platform and our vectorized antibody platform; TM our ability to continue to develop our proprietary gene therapy platform technologies, including our TRACER our plans to develop and commercialize our product candidates based on adeno associated virus, or AAV, gene therapy; The words anticipate, believe, estimate, expect, intend, may, might, plan, predict, project, target, potential, contemplate, anticipate, goals, will, would, could, should, continue, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements, although not all forward looking statements contain these identifying words. These forward looking statements include, among other things, statements about This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains forward looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, including statements regarding our strategy, future operations, future financial position, future revenue, projected costs, prospects, plans, objectives of management and expected market growth, are forward looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other important factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward looking statements. FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS Table of Contents 2 Signatures 140 Form 10 K Summary Item 16. 139 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V. 139 Principal Accountant Fees and Services Item 14. 139 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 139 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 139 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 139 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II. 137 Other Information Item 9B. 134 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 134 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 134 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 134 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk Item 7A. 118 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 118 [Reserved] Item 6. 118 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I. 117 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 117 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 117 Item 2 Properties
