CIK: 1719395
Company Name: EARGO INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2021-03-16
Accession Number: 0001564590-21-013613


Item 1 Business. T I PAR 3 actors for a discussion of important factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by our forward looking statements. Furthermore, if our forward looking statements prove to be inaccurate, the inaccuracy may be material. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update any forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. F , we cannot guarantee that the future results, levels of activity, performance or events and circumstances reflected in the forward looking statements will be achieved or occur at all. You should refer to the section titled Risk Annual Report on Form 10 K statements, you should not rely upon forward looking statements as predictions of future events. Although we believe that we have a reasonable basis for each forward looking statement contained in this 2 We have based these forward looking statements largely on our current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy and financial needs. In light of the significant uncertainties in these forward looking our future financial performance. estimates of our expenses, future revenue, capital requirements, our needs for additional financing and our ability to obtain additional capital; and our estimates regarding the COVID 19 pandemic, including but not limited to, its duration and its impact on our business and results of operations; our expectations regarding the time during which we will be an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act; our ability to effectively manage our growth; the scope of protection we are able to establish and maintain for intellectual property rights covering our products, including the projected terms of patent protection; the implementation of our business model and strategic plans for our business and products and technology; our relationships with, and the capabilities of, our comp1nt manufacturers, suppliers and freight carriers; our commercialization and marketing capabilities and expectations; our expectations with regard to changes in the regulatory landscape for hearing aid devices, including the implementation of the pending over the counter hearing aid pathway regulatory framework; our expectations regarding the ability to make certain claims related to the performance of our hearing aids relative to competitive products; the pricing of our hearing aids; our ability to maintain our competitive technological advantages against new entrants in our industry; developments and projections relating to our competitors and our industry, including competing products; our ability to release new hearing aids and the anticipated features of any such hearing aids; our expectations regarding the potential market size and size of the potential consumer populations for our products and any future products, including our ability to increase insurance coverage of Eargo hearing aids; our expectations concerning additional orders by existing customers; our ability to attract and retain customers; This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains forward looking statements about us and our industry that involve substantial risks, uncertainties and assumptions. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, including statements regarding our strategy, future financial condition, future operations, projected costs, prospects, plans, objectives of management and expected market growth, are forward looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward looking statements by terminology such as aim, anticipate, assume, believe, contemplate, continue, could, design, due, estimate, expect, goal, intend, may, objective, plan, positi1d, potential, predict, seek, should, target, will, would and other similar expressions that are predictions of or indicate future events and future trends, or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These forward looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about Special note regarding forward looking statements i 143 Item 16 Form 10 K Summary Item 16 143 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 142 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 140 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 137 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 130 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 124 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 123 Other Information Item 9B. 122 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 122 Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 95 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 94 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Item 7A. 77 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 75 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 73 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 72 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 72 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 72 Item 2 Properties
