CIK: 1800
Company Name: ABBOTT LABORATORIES
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2019-02-22
Accession Number: 0001047469-19-000624


ITEM 1 BUSINESS GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS Abbott Laboratories is an Illinois corporation, incorporated in 1900. Abbott's principal business is the discovery, development, manufacture, and sale of a broad and diversified line of health care products. NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS Abbott has four reportable segments Established Pharmaceutical Products, Diagnostic Products, Nutritional Products, and Cardiovascular and Neuromodulation Products. On October 3, 2017, Abbott completed the acquisition of Alere, Inc., a diagnostic device and service provider, for an aggregate consideration of approximately $4.5 billion in cash. On February 27, 2017, Abbott completed the sale of Abbott Medical Optics, its vision care business, to Johnson & Johnson for $4.325 billion in cash. On January 4, 2017, Abbott completed the acquisition of St. Jude Medical, Inc., a global medical device manufacturer. Based on the closing Abbott share price on January 4, 2017, the aggregate implied value of the consideration paid in connection with the acquisition was approximately $236 billion, including approximately $136 billion in cash and approximately $10 billion in Abbott common shares. Established Pharmaceutical Products These products include a broad line of branded generic pharmaceuticals manufactured worldwide and marketed and sold outside the United States in emerging markets. These products are generally sold directly to wholesalers, distributors, government agencies, health care facilities, pharmacies, and independent retailers from Abbott owned distribution centers and public warehouses, depending on the market served. Certain products are co marketed or co promoted with, or licensed from, other companies. The principal products included in the broad therapeutic area portfolios of the Established Pharmaceutical Products segment are gastroenterology products, including Creon , for the treatment of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency associated with several underlying conditions, including cystic fibrosis and chronic pancreatitis; Duspatal and Dicetel , for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome or biliary spasm; Heptral , Transmetil , and Samyr , for the treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis (associated with liver disease) or depressive symptoms; and Duphalac , for regulation of the physiological rhythm of the colon; women's health products, including Duphaston , for the treatment of many different gynecological disorders; and Femoston , a horm1 replacement therapy for postmenopausal women; cardiovascular and metabolic products, including Lipanthyl and TriCor , for the treatment of dyslipidemia; Teveten and Teveten Plus, for the treatment of essential hypertension, and Physiotens , for the treatment of hypertension; and Synthroid , for the treatment of hypothyroidism; pain and central nervous system products, including Serc , for the treatment of M ni re's disease and vestibular vertigo; Brufen , for the treatment of pain, fever, and inflammation, and Sevedol , for the treatment of severe migraines; and respiratory drugs and vaccines, including the anti infective clarithromycin (sold under the trademarks Biaxin , Klacid , and Klaricid ); and Influvac , an influenza vaccine. As used throughout the text of this report on Form 10 K, the term "Abbott" refers to Abbott Laboratories, an Illinois corporation, or Abbott Laboratories and its consolidated subsidiaries, as the context requires. 1 The Established Pharmaceutical Products segment directs its primary marketing efforts toward building a strong brand with key stakeholders, including consumers, pharmacists, physicians, and other healthcare providers. Government agencies are also important customers. Competition in the Established Pharmaceutical Products segment is generally from other health care and pharmaceutical companies. In addition, the substitution of generic drugs for the brand prescribed and introduction of additional forms of already marketed established products by generic or branded competitors may increase competitive pressures. Diagnostic Products These products include a broad line of diagnostic systems and tests manufactured, marketed, and sold worldwide. These products are generally marketed and sold directly to blood banks, hospitals, commercial laboratories, clinics, physicians' offices, government agencies, alternate care testing sites, and plasma protein therapeutic companies from Abbott owned distribution centers, public warehouses or third party distributors. The principal products included in the Diagnostic Products segment are core laboratory systems in the areas of immunoassay, clinical chemistry, hematology, and transfusion, including the Alinity family of instruments, ARCHITECT , ABBOTT PRISM , and Cell Dyn , with assays used for screening and or diagnosis for cancer, cardiac, metabolics, drugs of abuse, fertility, general chemistries, infectious diseases such as hepatitis and HIV, and therapeutic drug monitoring; molecular diagnostics systems, including the m2000 , an instrument that automates the extraction, purification, and preparation of DNA and RNA from patient samples, and detects and measures infectious agents including HIV, HBV, HCV, HPV, and CT NG; and the Vysis FISH product line of genomic based tests; point of care systems, including the i STAT and next generation i STAT Alinity and cartridges for blood analysis; rapid diagnostics systems in the areas of infectious disease, including respiratory illness such as influenza, HIV, and tropical diseases such as malaria and dengue fever; molecular point of care testing for HIV, including the m PIMA HIV 1 2 Viral Load Test, and for influenza A & B, RSV and strep A, including the ID NOW rapid molecular system; cardiometabolic testing, including Afinion and Cholestech platforms and tests; a toxicology business for drug and alcohol testing; and remote patient monitoring and consumer self testing; and informatics and automation solutions for use in laboratories, including laboratory automation systems, the RALS point of care solution, and AlinIQ , a suite of informatics tools and professional services. The Diagnostic Products segment's products are subject to competition in technological innovation, price, convenience of use, service, instrument warranty provisions, product performance, laboratory efficiency, long term supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness and productivity gains. Some products in this segment can be subject to rapid product obsolescence or regulatory changes. Although Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of certain of its current products, these advantages may be reduced or eliminated as competitors introduce new products. 2 Nutritional Products These products include a broad line of pediatric and adult nutritional products manufactured, marketed, and sold worldwide. These products are generally marketed and sold directly to consumers and to institutions, wholesalers, retailers, health care facilities, government agencies, and third party distributors from Abbott owned distribution centers or third party distributors. The principal products included in the Nutritional Products segment are various forms of prepared infant formula and follow on formula, including Similac , Similac Pro Advance , Similac Advance , Similac Advance Non GMO, Similac Pro Sensitive , Similac Sensitive , Similac Sensitive Non GMO, Go&Grow by Similac , Similac NeoSure , Similac Organic, Similac Special Care , Similac Total Comfort , Similac For Supplementation, Isomil Advance , Isomil , Alimentum , Gain , Grow , Similac En Mei Li , and Eleva ; adult and other pediatric nutritional products, including Ensure , Ensure Plus , Ensure Enlive , Ensure (with NutriVigor ), Ensure Max Protein, Ensure High Protein, Glucerna , Glucerna Hunger Smart , ProSure , PediaSure , PediaSure SideKicks , PediaSure Peptide, EleCare , Juven , Abound , Pedialyte and Z1 Perfect ; and nutritional products used in enteral feeding in health care institutions, including Jevity , Glucerna 12 Cal, Glucerna 15 Cal, Osmolite , Oxepa , Freego (Enteral Pump) and Freego sets, Nepro , and Vital . Primary marketing efforts for nutritional products are directed toward consumers or to securing the recommendation of Abbott's brand of products by physicians or other health care professionals. In addition, certain nutritional products sold as Similac , Gain , Grow , Eleva , PediaSure , PediaSure SideKicks , Pedialyte , Ensure , Z1 Perfect , and Glucerna are also promoted directly to the public by consumer marketing efforts in select markets where appropriate. Competition for nutritional products in the segment is generally from other diversified consumer and health care manufacturers. Competitive factors include consumer advertising, formulation, packaging, scientific innovation, price, retail distribution, and availability of product forms. A significant aspect of competition is the search for ingredient innovations. The introduction of new products by competitors, changes in medical practices and procedures, and regulatory changes can result in product obsolescence. In addition, private label and local manufacturers' products may increase competitive pressure. Cardiovascular and Neuromodulation Products These products include a broad line of rhythm management, electrophysiology, heart failure, vascular and structural heart devices for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases, as well as neuromodulation devices for the management of chronic pain and movement disorders. These products are manufactured, marketed and sold worldwide. In the United States, these products are generally marketed and sold directly to hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, and physicians' offices from Abbott owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Outside the United States, sales are made either directly to customers or through distributors, depending on the market served. The principal products included in the Cardiovascular and Neuromodulation Products segment are rhythm management products, including Assurity MRI and Endurity MRI pacemaker systems; Ellipse and Fortify Assura implantable cardioverter defibrillators and Quadra Assura MP implantable cardioverter defibrillator with cardiac resynchronization therapy and MultiPoint Pacing technology; electrophysiology products, including the TactiCath family of ablation catheters and FlexAbility irrigated ablation catheters; Ampere RF ablation generator; and EnSite Precision cardiac 3 mapping system; Confirm Rx implantable cardiac monitor; and the Advisor HD Grid mapping catheter; heart failure related products, including the HeartMate left ventricular device family and the CardioMEMS HF System pulmonary artery sensor, a heart failure monitoring system; vascular products, including the XIENCE family of drug eluting coronary stent systems developed on the Multi Link Vision platform; StarClose SE and Perclose ProGlide vessel closure devices, TREK coronary balloon dilatation products, Hi Torque Balance Middleweight Universal II guidewires, Supera Peripheral Stent System, a peripheral vascular stent system; Acculink Accunet and Xact Emboshield NAV6 , carotid stent systems; and the OPTIS integrated system with the Dragonfly OPTIS imaging catheter and PressureWire fractional flow reserve measurement systems; structural heart products, including MitraClip , a percutaneous mitral valve repair system; Trifecta Valve with Glide Technology, a surgical tissue heart valve; Portico transcatheter aortic heart valve, Regent mechanical heart valve, and AMPLATZER PFO occluders; and neuromodulation products, including spinal cord stimulators Proclaim Elite Recharge free IPG and Prodigy MRI IPG, both with BurstDR stimulation, and Proclaim DRG IPG, a neurostimulation device designed for dorsal root ganglion therapy, for the treatment of chronic pain disorders; and the Infinity Deep Brain Stimulation System with directional lead technology for the treatment of movement disorders. The Cardiovascular and Neuromodulation Products segment's products are subject to competition in technological innovation, price, convenience of use, service, product performance, long term supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness and productivity gains. Some products in this segment can be subject to rapid product obsolescence or regulatory changes. Although Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of certain of its current products, these advantages may be reduced or eliminated as competitors introduce new products. Other Products The principal products in Abbott's other businesses include continuous glucose and blood glucose monitoring systems, including test strips, sensors, data management decision software, and accessories for people with diabetes, under the FreeStyle brand such as the FreeStyle Libre system. These products are marketed worldwide and generally sold directly to wholesalers, government agencies, private health care organizations, health care facilities, mail order pharmacies, and independent retailers from Abbott owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Some of these products are also marketed and distributed through distributors. Blood and continuous glucose monitoring systems are also marketed and sold to consumers. These products are subject to regulatory changes and competition in technological innovation, price, convenience of use, service, and product performance. INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO ABBOTT'S BUSINESS IN GENERAL Sources and Availability of Raw Materials Abbott purchases, in the ordinary course of business, raw materials and supplies essential to Abbott's operations from numerous suppliers in the United States and around the world. There have been no recent significant availability problems or supply shortages for raw materials or supplies. Patents, Trademarks, and Licenses Abbott is aware of the desirability for patent and trademark protection for its products. Accordingly, where possible, patents and trademarks are sought and obtained for Abbott's products in the United States 4 and countries of interest to Abbott. Abbott owns or has licenses under a substantial number of patents and patent applications. Principal trademarks and the products they cover are discussed in the Narrative Description of Business on pages 1 through 4. These, and various patents which expire during the period 2019 to 2039, in the aggregate, are believed to be of material importance in the operation of Abbott's business. Abbott believes that no single patent, license, or trademark is material in relation to Abbott's business as a whole. Seasonal Aspects, Customers, Backlog, and Renegotiation There are no significant seasonal aspects to Abbott's business. Abbott has no single customer that, if the customer were lost, would have a material adverse effect on Abbott. Orders for Abbott's products are generally filled on a current basis, and order backlog is not material to Abbott's business. No material portion of Abbott's business is subject to renegotiation of profits or termination of contracts at the election of a government. Environmental Matters Abbott believes that its operations comply in all material respects with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection. Regulations under federal and state environmental laws impose stringent limitations on emissions and discharges to the environment from various manufacturing operations. Abbott's capital and operating expenditures for pollution control in 2018 were not material and are not expected to be material in 2019. Abbott has been identified as 1 of many potentially responsible parties in investigations and or remediations at several locations in the United States, including Puerto Rico, under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund. Abbott is also engaged in remediation at several other sites, some of which are owned by Abbott, in cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency or similar agencies. While it is not feasible to predict with certainty the final costs related to those investigations and remediation activities, Abbott believes that such costs, together with other expenditures to maintain compliance with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection, should not have a material adverse effect on Abbott's financial position, cash flows, or results of operations. Employees Abbott employed approximately 103,000 people as of December 31, 2018. Regulation The development, manufacture, marketing, sale, promotion, and distribution of Abbott's products are subject to comprehensive government regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and similar international regulatory agencies. Government regulation by various international, supranational, federal and state agencies addresses (among other matters) the development and approval to market Abbott's products, as well as the inspection of, and controls over, research and laboratory procedures, clinical investigations, product approvals and manufacturing, labeling, packaging, supply chains, marketing and promotion, pricing and reimbursement, sampling, distribution, quality control, post market surveillance, record keeping, storage, and disposal practices. In addition, Abbott's clinical laboratories and associated testing services are subject to comprehensive government regulation, including registration, certification, and licensure, by federal, state, and local agencies, such as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and their respective foreign counterparts. Certain of these agencies require our clinical laboratories to meet quality assurance, quality control, and personnel standards and undergo inspections. 5 Abbott's international operations are also affected by trade and investment regulations in many countries. These may require local investment, restrict Abbott's investments, or limit the import of raw materials and finished products. Abbott's home monitoring services and related products and laboratories that provide Abbott and third party medical devices to consumers in the United States are subject to additional federal, state, and local laws and regulations applicable to health care providers and suppliers that submit claims for reimbursement to third party payors. Medicare, Medicaid, and other third party payors may from time to time conduct inquiries, claims audits, investigations, and enforcement actions relating to the claims or enrollment criteria. Abbott is subject to laws and regulations pertaining to health care fraud and abuse, including state and federal anti kickback, anti self referral, and false claims laws in the United States. Prescription drug, nutrition, and medical device manufacturers such as Abbott are also subject to taxes, as well as application, product, user, establishment, and other fees. Governmental agencies can also invalidate intellectual property rights. Compliance with these laws and regulations is costly and materially affects Abbott's business. Among other effects, health care regulations substantially increase the time, difficulty, and costs incurred in obtaining and maintaining approval to market newly developed and existing products. Abbott expects this regulatory environment will continue to require significant technical expertise and investment to ensure compliance. Failure to comply can delay the release of a new product or result in regulatory and enforcement actions, the seizure or recall of a product, the suspension or revocation of the authority necessary for a product's production and sale, suspension or revocation of billing privileges, and other civil or criminal sanctions, including fines and penalties. Similarly, compliance with the laws and regulations governing clinical laboratories and testing services requires specialized expertise. Failure to comply with these regulatory requirements can result in sanctions, including suspension, revocation, or limitation of a laboratory's certification, which is necessary to conduct business, as well as significant fines or criminal penalties. Abbott's business can also be affected by ongoing studies of the utilization, safety, efficacy, and outcomes of health care products and their comp1nts that are regularly conducted by industry participants, government agencies, and others. These studies can call into question the utilization, safety, and efficacy of previously marketed products. In some cases, these studies have resulted, and may in the future result, in the discontinuation of marketing of such products in 1 or more countries, and may give rise to claims for damages from persons who believe they have been injured as a result of their use. Access to human health care products continues to be a subject of investigation and action by governmental agencies, legislative bodies, and private organizations in many countries. A major focus is cost containment. Efforts to reduce health care costs are also being made in the private sector, notably by health care payors and providers, which have instituted various cost reduction and containment measures. Abbott expects insurers and providers will continue attempts to reduce the cost or utilization of health care products. Many countries control the price of health care products directly or indirectly, through reimbursement, payment, pricing, or coverage limitations. Budgetary pressures on health care payors may also heighten the scope and severity of pricing pressures on Abbott's products for the foreseeable future. In the United States, the federal government regularly evaluates reimbursement for medical devices, diagnostics, supplies, and other products, as well as the procedures in which these products may be used. The government follows a diagnosis related group (DRG) payment system for certain institutional services provided under Medicare or Medicaid and has implemented a prospective payment system (PPS) for services delivered in hospital outpatient, nursing home, and home health settings. DRG and PPS entitle a health care facility to a fixed reimbursement based on the diagnosis and or procedure rather than actual costs incurred in patient treatment, thereby increasing the incentive for the facility to limit or control expenditures for many health care products. Other payment methodology changes have been proposed and 6 implemented from time to time. For example, Medicare implemented a competitive bidding system for certain durable medical equipment (including diabetes products), enteral nutrition products, and supplies. Additionally, the Protecting Access to Medicare Act establishes a new payment system for clinical laboratory tests, which became effective on January 1, 2018. In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (together, the Affordable Care Act), imposed an excise tax on Abbott and other medical device manufacturers and importers. The excise tax was subsequently suspended from January 1, 2016 through December 31, 2017 as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016. In January 2018, the excise tax was suspended for an additional 2 years. The Affordable Care Act also includes provisions known as the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, which requires manufacturers of drugs, devices, and medical supplies covered under Medicare and Medicaid to record any transfers of value to physicians and teaching hospitals and to report this data to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services for subsequent public disclosure. In October 2018, the Substance Use Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities Act significantly expanded the types of healthcare providers for which reporting is required, beginning with reports filed in 2022 Similar reporting requirements have also been enacted on the state level domestically, and an increasing number of governments worldwide either have adopted or are considering similar laws requiring transparency of interactions with health care professionals. Failure to report appropriate data may result in civil or criminal fines and or penalties. Policy changes, including potential modification or repeal of all or parts of the Affordable Care Act, or implementation of new health care legislation, could result in significant changes to the health care system. The regulation of data privacy and security, and the protection of the confidentiality of certain personal information (including patient health information and financial information), is increasing. For example, the European Union has enacted stricter data protection laws, which took effect in 2018, that contain enhanced financial penalties for noncompliance. Similarly, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has issued rules governing the use, disclosure, and security of protected health information, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has issued further guidance concerning cybersecurity for medical devices. In addition, certain countries have issued or are considering "data localization" laws, which limit companies' ability to transfer protected data across country borders. Failure to comply with data privacy and security laws and regulations can result in enforcement actions, which could include civil or criminal penalties. Transferring and managing protected information will become more challenging as laws and regulations are enacted or amended, and Abbott expects there will be increasing complexity in this area. Governmental cost containment efforts also affect Abbott's nutritional products business. In the United States, for example, under regulations governing the federally funded Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, all states must have a cost containment program for infant formula. As a result, through competitive bidding states obtain rebates from manufacturers of infant formula whose products are used in the program. Abbott expects debate to continue at all government levels worldwide over the marketing, manufacture, availability, method of delivery, and payment for health care products and services, as well as data privacy and security. Abbott believes that future legislation and regulation in the markets it serves could affect access to health care products and services, increase rebates, reduce prices or reimbursements or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, change health care delivery systems, create new fees and obligations for the pharmaceutical, nutrition, diagnostic, and medical device industries, or require additional reporting and disclosure. It is not possible to predict the extent to which Abbott or the health care industry in general might be affected by the matters discussed above. 7 INTERNET INFORMATION Copies of Abbott's Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available free of charge through Abbott's investor relations website ( www.abbottinvestor.com ) as soon as reasonably practicable after Abbott electronically files the material with, or furnishes it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. These reports and other information are also available, free of charge, at www.sec.gov. Abbott's corporate governance guidelines, outline of directorship qualifications, code of business conduct and the charters of Abbott's audit committee, compensation committee, nominations and governance committee, and public policy committee are all available on Abbott's investor relations website ( www.abbottinvestor.com ). 8 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information in this report, the following risk factors should be considered before deciding to invest in any of Abbott's securities. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to Abbott, or risks Abbott currently considers immaterial, could also affect Abbott's actual results. Abbott's business, financial condition, results of operations, or prospects could be materially adversely affected by any of these risks. Abbott may acquire other businesses, license rights to technologies or products, form alliances, or dispose of or spin off businesses, which could cause it to incur significant expenses and could negatively affect profitability. Abbott may pursue acquisitions, licensing arrangements, and strategic alliances, or dispose of or spin off some of its businesses, as part of its business strategy. Abbott may not complete these transactions in a timely manner, on a cost effective basis, or at all, and may not realize the expected benefits. If Abbott is successful in making an acquisition, the products and technologies that are acquired may not be successful or may require significantly greater resources and investments than originally anticipated. Abbott may not be able to integrate acquisitions successfully into its existing business or transition disposed businesses efficiently, and could incur or assume significant debt and unknown or contingent liabilities. Abbott could also experience negative effects on its reported results of operations from acquisition or disposition related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles and charges for impairment of long term assets. These effects could cause a deterioration of Abbott's credit rating, result in increased borrowing costs and interest expense, and decrease liquidity. Abbott is subject to cost containment efforts that could cause a reduction in future revenues and operating income. In the United States and other countries, Abbott's businesses have experienced downward pressure on product pricing. Cost containment efforts by governments and private organizations are described in greater detail in the section capti1d "Regulation." To the extent these cost containment efforts are not offset by greater patient access to health care or other factors, Abbott's future revenues and operating income will be reduced. Abbott is subject to numerous governmental regulations and it can be costly to comply with these regulations and to develop compliant products and processes. Abbott's products are subject to rigorous regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and numerous international, supranational, federal, and state authorities. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a drug, medical device, or diagnostic product can be costly and time consuming, and approvals might not be granted for future products, or additional indications or uses of existing products, on a timely basis, if at all. Delays in the receipt of, or failure to obtain, approvals for future products, or new indications and uses, could result in delayed realization of product revenues, reduction in revenues, and substantial additional costs. In addition, no assurance can be given that Abbott will remain in compliance with applicable FDA and other regulatory requirements once approval or marketing authorization has been obtained for a product. These requirements include, among other things, regulations regarding manufacturing practices, product labeling, and advertising and postmarketing reporting, including adverse event reports and field alerts. Many of Abbott's facilities and procedures and those of Abbott's suppliers are subject to ongoing regulation, including periodic inspection by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Abbott must incur expense and spend time and effort to ensure compliance with these complex regulations. Possible regulatory actions for non compliance could include warning letters, fines, damages, injunctions, civil penalties, recalls, seizures of Abbott's products, and criminal prosecution. 9 These actions could result in, among other things, substantial modifications to Abbott's business practices and operations; refunds, recalls, or seizures of Abbott's products; a total or partial shutdown of production in 1 or more facilities while Abbott or Abbott's suppliers remedy the alleged violation; the inability to obtain future pre market approvals or marketing authorizations; and withdrawals or suspensions of current products from the market. Any of these events could disrupt Abbott's business and have a material adverse effect on Abbott's revenues, profitability and financial condition. Laws and regulations affecting government benefit programs could impose new obligations on Abbott, require Abbott to change its business practices, and restrict its operations in the future. Abbott's industry is subject to various international, supranational, federal, and state laws and regulations pertaining to government benefit program reimbursement, price reporting and regulation, and health care fraud and abuse, including anti kickback and false claims laws, and international and individual state laws relating to pricing and sales and marketing practices. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal and or civil sanctions, including, in some instances, substantial fines, imprisonment, and exclusion from participation in government health care programs, including Medicare, Medicaid, and Veterans Administration health programs in the U.S. These laws and regulations are broad in scope and they are subject to evolving interpretations, which could require Abbott to incur substantial costs associated with compliance or to alter 1 or more of its sales or marketing practices. In addition, violations of these laws, or allegations of such violations, could disrupt Abbott's business and result in a material adverse effect on Abbott's revenues, profitability, and financial condition. Changes in the health care regulatory environment may adversely affect Abbott's business. Both in the U.S. and internationally, government authorities may enact changes in regulatory requirements, make legislative or administrative reforms to existing reimbursement programs, make adverse decisions relating to our products' coverage or reimbursement, or make changes to patient access to health care, all of which could adversely impact the demand for and usage of Abbott's products or the prices that Abbott's customers are willing to pay for them. Further, in the U.S., a number of the provisions of the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 address access to health care products and services and establish certain fees for the medical device industry. These provisions may be modified, repealed, or otherwise invalidated, in whole or in part. Future rulemaking could affect rebates, prices or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, or required reporting and disclosure. Abbott cannot predict the timing or impact of any future rulemaking or changes in the law. For additional information concerning health care regulation, see the discussion in "Regulation" under Item 1, "Business." Abbott has incurred and assumed significant indebtedness, which has increased consolidated interest expense and could decrease business flexibility. Abbott incurred and assumed significant indebtedness in connection with the 2017 acquisitions of St. Jude Medical and Alere. As of December 31, 2018, Abbott's consolidated indebtedness was approximately $19.6 billion. This consolidated indebtedness increased Abbott's consolidated interest expense and could have the effect, among other things, of reducing Abbott's flexibility to respond to changing business and economic conditions, and reducing funds available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and other general corporate purposes. Further, Abbott may be required to raise additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, future acquisitions or other general corporate purposes. Abbott's ability to arrange additional financing or refinancing will depend on, among other factors, Abbott's financial position and performance, as well as prevailing market conditions and other factors beyond Abbott's control. 10 Consequently, Abbott cannot assure that it will be able to obtain additional financing or refinancing on terms acceptable to Abbott or at all, which could adversely impact Abbott's ability to make scheduled payments with respect to its consolidated indebtedness and its profitability and financial condition. Additionally, further borrowing could cause a deterioration of Abbott's credit rating. Abbott's credit ratings reflect each credit rating agency's then opinion of Abbott's financial strength, operating performance, and ability to meet its debt obligations. Adverse changes in Abbott's credit ratings may result in increased borrowing costs for future long term debt or short term borrowing facilities and may limit financing options, including access to the unsecured borrowing market. Abbott may also be subject to additional restrictive covenants that would reduce flexibility. Abbott depends on sophisticated information technology systems and maintains protected personal data, and a cyber attack or other breach affecting these information technology systems or protected data could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's results of operations. Similar to other large multi national companies, the size and complexity of the information technology systems on which Abbott relies for both its infrastructure and products makes them susceptible to a cyber attack, malicious intrusion, breakdown, destruction, loss of data privacy, or other significant disruption. These systems have been and are expected to continue to be the target of malware and other cyber attacks. In addition, third party hacking attempts may cause Abbott's information technology systems and related products, protected data, or proprietary information to be compromised. A significant attack or other disruption could result in adverse consequences, including increased costs and expenses, problems with product functionality, damage to customer relations, lost revenue, and legal or regulatory penalties. Abbott also collects, manages and processes protected personal data, including protected health information, in connection with certain medical products and service offerings. For additional information concerning data privacy and security regulation, see the discussion in "Regulation" under Item 1, "Business." A breach of protected personal information could result in adverse consequences, including regulatory inquiries or litigation, increased costs and expenses, reputational damage, lost revenue, and fines or penalties. Abbott invests in its systems and technology and in the protection of its products and data to reduce the risk of an attack or other significant disruption, and monitors its systems on an ongoing basis for any current or potential threats and for changes in technology and the regulatory environment. There can be no assurance that these measures and efforts will prevent future attacks or other significant disruptions to any of the systems on which Abbott relies or that related product issues will not arise in the future. Any significant attack or other disruption on Abbott's systems or products could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's business. The expiration or loss of patent protection and licenses may affect Abbott's future revenues and operating income. Many of Abbott's businesses rely on patent and trademark and other intellectual property protection. Although most of the challenges to Abbott's intellectual property have come from other companies, governments may also challenge intellectual property protections. To the extent Abbott's intellectual property is successfully challenged, invalidated, or circumvented or to the extent it does not allow Abbott to compete effectively, Abbott's businesses could suffer. To the extent that countries do not enforce Abbott's intellectual property rights, Abbott's future revenues and operating income could be reduced. Any material litigation regarding Abbott's patents and trademarks is described in the section capti1d "Legal Proceedings." 11 Competitors' intellectual property may prevent Abbott from selling its products or have a material adverse effect on Abbott's future profitability and financial condition. Competitors may claim that an Abbott product infringes upon their intellectual property. Resolving an intellectual property infringement claim can be costly and time consuming and may require Abbott to enter into license agreements. Abbott cannot guarantee that it would be able to obtain license agreements on commercially reasonable terms. A successful claim of patent or other intellectual property infringement could subject Abbott to significant damages or an injunction preventing the manufacture, sale or use of affected Abbott products. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's profitability and financial condition. Abbott's research and development efforts may not succeed in developing commercially successful products and technologies, which may cause Abbott's revenue and profitability to decline. To remain competitive, Abbott must continue to launch new products and technologies. To accomplish this, Abbott commits substantial efforts, funds, and other resources to research and development. A risk of failure is inherent in the research and development of new products and technologies. Abbott must make ongoing substantial expenditures without any assurance that its efforts will be commercially successful. Failure can occur at any point in the process, including after significant funds have been invested. Promising new products and technologies may fail to reach the market or may only have limited commercial success because of efficacy or safety concerns, failure to achieve positive clinical outcomes, inability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals, limited scope of approved uses, excessive costs to manufacture, failure to establish or maintain intellectual property rights, or infringement of the intellectual property rights of others. Even if Abbott successfully develops new products or enhancements or new generations of Abbott's existing products, they may be quickly rendered obsolete by changing customer preferences, changing industry standards, or competitors' innovations. Innovations may not be accepted quickly in the marketplace because of, among other things, entrenched patterns of clinical practice or uncertainty over third party reimbursement. Abbott cannot state with certainty when or whether any of its products under development will be launched, whether it will be able to develop, license, or otherwise acquire compounds or products, or whether any products will be commercially successful. Failure to launch successful new products or technologies, or new indications or uses for existing products, may cause Abbott's products or technologies to become obsolete, causing Abbott's revenues and operating results to suffer. New products and technological advances by Abbott's competitors may negatively affect Abbott's results of operations. Abbott's products face intense competition from its competitors' products. Competitors' products may be safer, more effective, more effectively marketed or sold, or have lower prices or superior performance features than Abbott's products. Abbott cannot predict with certainty the timing or impact of the introduction of competitors' products. The manufacture of many of Abbott's products is a highly exacting and complex process, and if Abbott or 1 of its suppliers encounters problems manufacturing products, Abbott's business could suffer. The manufacture of many of Abbott's products is a highly exacting and complex process, due in part to strict regulatory requirements. Problems may arise during manufacturing for a variety of reasons, including equipment malfunction, failure to follow specific protocols and procedures, problems with raw materials, natural disasters, and environmental factors. In addition, single suppliers are currently used for certain products and materials. If problems arise during the production of a lot or batch of product, those products may have to be discarded. This could, among other things, lead to increased costs, lost revenue, damage to customer relations, time and expense spent investigating the cause and, depending on the cause, 12 similar losses with respect to other lots, batches or products. If problems are not discovered before the product is released to the market, recall and product liability costs may also be incurred. To the extent Abbott or 1 of its suppliers experiences significant manufacturing problems, this could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's revenues and profitability. Significant safety concerns could arise for Abbott's products, which could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's revenues and financial condition. Health care products typically receive regulatory approval based on data obtained in controlled clinical trials of limited duration. Following regulatory approval, these products will be used over longer periods of time in many patients. Investigators may also conduct additional, and perhaps more extensive, studies. If new safety issues are reported, Abbott may be required to amend the conditions of use for a product. For example, Abbott may be required to provide additional warnings on a product's label or narrow its approved intended use, either of which could reduce the product's market acceptance. If serious safety issues arise with an Abbott product, sales of the product could be halted by Abbott or by regulatory authorities. Safety issues affecting suppliers' or competitors' products also may reduce the market acceptance of Abbott's products. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, Abbott is the subject of product liability claims and lawsuits alleging that its products or the products of other companies that Abbott promotes have resulted or could result in an unsafe condition for or injury to patients. Product liability claims and lawsuits, safety alerts or product recalls, and other allegations of product safety or quality issues, regardless of their validity or ultimate outcome, may have a material adverse effect on Abbott's business and reputation and on Abbott's ability to attract and retain customers. Consequences may also include additional costs, a decrease in market share for the products, lower income or exposure to other claims. Product liability losses are self insured. Product liability claims could have a material adverse effect on Abbott's profitability and financial condition. Fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely affect our financial statements and Abbott's ability to realize projected sales and earnings. Although Abbott's financial statements are denominated in U.S. dollars, a significant portion of Abbott's revenues and costs are realized in other currencies. Sales outside of the United States in 2018 made up approximately 65 percent of Abbott's net sales. Abbott's profitability is affected by movement of the U.S. dollar against other currencies. Fluctuations in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and other currencies may also affect the reported value of Abbott's assets and liabilities, as well as its cash flows. Some foreign currencies are subject to government exchange controls. While Abbott enters into hedging arrangements to mitigate some of its foreign currency exposure, Abbott cannot predict with any certainty changes in foreign currency exchange rates or its ability to mitigate these risks. Information on the impact of foreign exchange rates on Abbott's financial results is contained in the "Financial Review Results of Operations" section in Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of this report. A discussion of the steps taken to mitigate the impact of foreign exchange is contained in Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk in Abbott's 2018 Form 10 K. Information on Abbott's hedging arrangements is contained in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements in this report. Deterioration in the economic condition and credit quality of certain countries may negatively affect Abbott's results of operations. Unfavorable economic conditions in certain countries may increase the time it takes to collect outstanding trade receivables. Financial instability and fiscal deficits in these countries may result in additional austerity measures to reduce costs, including health care. Deterioration in the quality of 13 sovereign debt, including credit downgrades, could increase Abbott's collection risk where a significant amount of Abbott's receivables in these countries are with governmental health care systems or where Abbott's customers depend on payment by government health care systems. The international nature of Abbott's business subjects it to additional business risks that may cause its revenue and profitability to decline. Abbott's business is subject to risks associated with managing a global supply chain and doing business internationally. Sales outside of the United States in 2018 made up approximately 65 percent of Abbott's net sales. Additional risks associated with Abbott's international operations include differing local product preferences and product requirements; trade protection measures, including tariffs, import or export licensing requirements, and changes to international trade agreements; difficulty in establishing, staffing, and managing operations; differing labor regulations; potentially negative consequences from changes in or interpretations of tax laws; political and economic instability, including sovereign debt issues; restrictions on local currency conversion and or cash extraction; price controls, limitations on participation in local enterprises, expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental action; inflation, recession, and fluctuations in interest rates; diminished protection of intellectual property; and potential penalties or other adverse consequences for violations of anti corruption, anti bribery, and other similar laws and regulations, including the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the U.K. Bribery Act. Events contemplated by these risks may, individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on Abbott's revenues and profitability. Other factors can have a material adverse effect on Abbott's future profitability and financial condition. Many other factors can affect Abbott's profitability and its financial condition, including changes in or interpretations of laws and regulations, including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements, product marketing application standards, product labeling, source and use laws, and environmental laws; differences between the fair value measurement of assets and liabilities and their actual value, particularly for pensions, retiree health care, stock compensation, intangibles, goodwill, and contingent consideration; and for contingent liabilities such as litigation, the absence of a recorded amount, or an amount recorded at the minimum, compared to the actual amount; changes in the rate of inflation (including the cost of raw materials, commodities, and supplies), interest rates, market value of Abbott's equity investments, and the performance of investments held by Abbott or Abbott's employee benefit trusts; changes in the credi2rthiness of counterparties that transact business with or provide services to Abbott or Abbott's employee benefit trusts; 14 changes in business, economic, and political conditions, including war, political instability, terrorist attacks, the threat of future terrorist activity and related military action; global climate, extreme weather and natural disasters; widespread outbreaks of infectious diseases, the cost and availability of insurance due to any of the foregoing events; labor disputes, strikes, slow downs, or other forms of labor or union activity; and pressure from third party interest groups; changes in Abbott's business units and investments and changes in the relative and absolute contribution of each to earnings and cash flow resulting from evolving business strategies, changing product mix, changes in tax laws or tax rates both in the U.S. and abroad and opportunities existing now or in the future; changes in the buying patterns of a major distributor, retailer, or wholesale customer resulting from buyer purchasing decisions, pricing, seasonality, or other factors, or other problems with licensors, suppliers, distributors, and business partners; and legal difficulties, any of which could preclude or delay commercialization of products or adversely affect profitability, including claims asserting statutory or regulatory violations, and adverse litigation decisions. CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS This Form 10 K contains forward looking statements that are based on management's current expectations, estimates, and projections. Words such as "expects," "anticipates," "intends," "plans," "believes," "seeks," "estimates," "forecasts," variations of these words, and similar expressions are intended to identify these forward looking statements. Certain factors, including but not limited to those identified under "Item 1A. Risk Factors" of this Form 10 K, may cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations, estimates, projections, forecasts, and from past results. No assurance can be made that any expectation, estimate, or projection contained in a forward looking statement will be achieved or will not be affected by the factors cited above or other future events. Abbott undertakes no obligation to release publicly any revisions to forward looking statements as the result of subsequent events or developments, except as required by law. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 15 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES 
