CIK: 1800
Company Name: ABBOTT LABORATORIES
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2022-02-18
Accession Number: 0001104659-22-025141


ITEM 1 BUSINESS GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS Abbott Laboratories is an Illinois corporation, incorporated in 1900. Abbott s principal business is the discovery, development, manufacture, and sale of a broad and diversified line of health care products. NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS Abbott has four reportable segments Established Pharmaceutical Products, Diagnostic Products, Nutritional Products, and Medical Devices. Established Pharmaceutical Products These products include a broad line of branded generic pharmaceuticals manufactured worldwide and marketed and sold outside the United States in emerging markets. These products are generally sold directly to wholesalers, distributors, government agencies, health care facilities, pharmacies, and independent retailers from Abbott owned distribution centers and public warehouses, depending on the market served. Certain products are co marketed or co promoted with, or licensed from, other companies. The principal products included in the broad therapeutic area portfolios of the Established Pharmaceutical Products segment are gastroenterology products, including Creon , for the treatment of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency associated with several underlying conditions, including cystic fibrosis and chronic pancreatitis; Duspatal and Dicetel , for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome or biliary spasm; Heptral , Transmetil , and Samyr , for the treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis (associated with liver disease) or depressive symptoms; and Duphalac , for regulation of the physiological rhythm of the colon; women health products, including Duphaston , for the treatment of many different gynecological disorders; and Femoston , a horm1 replacement therapy for postmenopausal women; cardiovascular and metabolic products, including Lipanthyl and TriCor , for the treatment of dyslipidemia; Teveten and Teveten Plus, for the treatment of essential hypertension, and Physiotens , for the treatment of hypertension; and Synthroid , for the treatment of hypothyroidism; pain and central nervous system products, including Serc , for the treatment of M ni re disease and vestibular vertigo; Brufen , for the treatment of pain, fever, and inflammation; and Sevedol , for the treatment of severe migraines; and respiratory drugs and vaccines, including the anti infective clarithromycin (sold under the trademarks Biaxin , Klacid , and Klaricid ); and Influvac , an influenza vaccine. The Established Pharmaceutical Products segment directs its primary marketing efforts toward building strong brands with key stakeholders, including consumers, pharmacists, physicians, and other healthcare providers. Government agencies are also important customers. Competition in the Established Pharmaceutical Products segment is generally from other health care and pharmaceutical companies. In addition, the substitution of generic drugs for the brand prescribed and introduction of additional forms of already marketed established products by generic or branded competitors may increase competitive pressures. As used throughout the text of this report on Form 10 K, the term Abbott refers to Abbott Laboratories, an Illinois corporation, or Abbott Laboratories and its consolidated subsidiaries, as the context requires. 1 Diagnostic Products These products include a broad line of diagnostic systems and tests manufactured, marketed, and sold worldwide. These products are generally marketed and sold directly to blood banks, hospitals, commercial laboratories, clinics, physicians offices, retailers, government agencies, alternate care testing sites, and plasma protein therapeutic companies from Abbott owned distribution centers, public warehouses or third party distributors. The principal products included in the Diagnostic Products segment are core laboratory systems in the areas of immunoassay, clinical chemistry, hematology, and transfusion medicine, including the Alinity family of instruments, ARCHITECT , ABBOTT PRISM , and Cell Dyn , with assays used for screening and or diagnosis for cancer, cardiac, metabolics, drugs of abuse, fertility, general chemistries, infectious diseases such as hepatitis and HIV, therapeutic drug monitoring, and a suite of SARS CoV 2 serology assays; molecular diagnostics polymerase chain reaction (PCR) instrument systems, including Alinity m and m2000 that automate the extraction, purification, and preparation of DNA and RNA from patient samples, and detect and measure infectious agents including HIV, hepatitis, HPV, sexually transmitted infections, SARS CoV 2 and influenza A & B, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV);and products for oncology with the Vysis FISH product line of genomic based tests; point of care systems, including the i STAT and next generation i STAT Alinity and cartridges for testing blood gas, chemistry, electrolytes, coagulation and immunoassay; rapid diagnostics lateral flow testing products in the area of infectious diseases such as SARS CoV 2, including the BinaxNOW and Panbio rapid testing platforms, influenza, HIV, hepatitis, and tropical diseases such as malaria and dengue fever; molecular point of care testing for HIV, including the m PIMA HIV 1 2 Viral Load Test, and for SARS CoV 2 and influenza A & B, RSV and strep A, including the ID NOW rapid molecular system; cardiometabolic testing, including Afinion and Cholestech LDX platforms and tests; a toxicology business for drug and alcohol testing; and remote patient monitoring and consumer self testing; and informatics and automation solutions for use in laboratories, including laboratory automation systems such as the GLP track system,the RALS point of care solution, and AlinIQ , a suite of informatics tools and professional services. The Diagnostic Products segment products are subject to competition in technological innovation, price, convenience of use, service, instrument warranty provisions, product performance, laboratory efficiency, long term supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness and productivity gains. Some products in this segment can be subject to rapid product obsolescence or regulatory changes. Although Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of certain of its current products, these advantages may be reduced or eliminated as competitors introduce new products. Nutritional Products These products include a broad line of pediatric and adult nutritional products manufactured, marketed, and sold worldwide. These products are generally marketed and sold directly to consumers and to institutions, wholesalers, retailers, health care facilities, government agencies, and third party distributors from Abbott owned distribution centers or third party distributors. The principal products included in the Nutritional Products segment are various forms of infant formula and follow on formula, including Similac , Similac 360 Total Care , Similac Pro Advance , Similac Advance , Similac Advance Non GMO, Similac Pro Sensitive , Similac Sensitive , Similac Sensitive Non GMO, Go&Grow by Similac , Similac NeoSure , Similac Organic, Similac Special Care , Similac Total Comfort , Similac For Supplementation, Isomil Advance , Isomil , Alimentum , Gain , Grow , Similac En Mei Li , and Eleva ; adult and other pediatric nutritional products, including Ensure , Ensure Plus , Ensure Enlive , Ensure (with NutriVigor ), Ensure Max Protein, Ensure High Protein, Glucerna , Glucerna Hunger Smart , ProSure , PediaSure , PediaSure SideKicks , PediaSure Peptide, EleCare , Juven , Abound , Pedialyte and Z1 Perfect ; and nutritional products used in enteral feeding in health care institutions, including Jevity , Glucerna 12 Cal, Glucerna 15 Cal, Osmolite , Oxepa , Freego (Enteral Pump) and Freego sets, Nepro , and Vital . Primary marketing efforts for nutritional products are directed toward consumers or to securing the recommendation of Abbott brand of products by physicians or other health care professionals. In addition, nutritional products are also promoted directly to the public by consumer marketing efforts in markets where permitted. 2 Competition for nutritional products in the segment is generally from other diversified consumer and health care manufacturers. Competitive factors include consumer advertising, formulation, packaging, scientific innovation, price, retail distribution, and availability of product forms. A significant aspect of competition is the search for ingredient innovations. The introduction of new products by competitors, changes in medical practices and procedures, and regulatory changes can result in product obsolescence. In addition, private label and local manufacturers products may increase competitive pressure. Medical Devices These products include a broad line of rhythm management, electrophysiology, heart failure, vascular and structural heart devices for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases, and diabetes care products for people with diabetes, as well as neuromodulation devices for the management of chronic pain and movement disorders. Medical devices are manufactured, marketed and sold worldwide. In the United States, depending upon the product, medical devices are generally marketed and sold directly to wholesalers, hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, physicians offices, and distributors from Abbott owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Outside the United States, sales are made either directly to customers or through distributors, depending on the market served. The principal products included in the Medical Devices segment are rhythm management products, including Assurity MRI and Endurity MRI pacemaker systems; Ellipse , Fortify Assura , and Gallant implantable cardioverter defibrillators and Gallant and Quadra Assura MP implantable cardioverter defibrillator with cardiac resynchronization therapy and MultiPoint Pacing technology; and Confirm Rx and Jot Dx implantable cardiac monitors; electrophysiology products, including the TactiCath family of ablation catheters and FlexAbility irrigated ablation catheters; Ampere RF ablation generator; EnSite family of cardiac mapping systems; Agilis NxT Steerable Introducer; the Advisor HD Grid mapping catheter; ViewFlex family of intracardiac echocardiography catheters; and ViewMate Ultrasound System; heart failure related products, including the HeartMate left ventricular device family, the CardioMEMS HF System pulmonary artery sensor, a heart failure monitoring system, and the CentriMag System, an acute circulatory support system; vascular products, including the XIENCE family of drug eluting coronary stent systems developed on the Multi Link Vision platform; StarClose SE , Perclose ProGlide and Perclose ProStyle vessel closure devices, TREK coronary balloon dilatation products, Hi Torque Balance Middleweight Universal II guidewires, Supera Peripheral Stent System, a peripheral vascular stent system; Acculink Accunet and Xact Emboshield NAV6 , carotid stent systems; the OPTIS integrated systems with Ultreon 10 Software, compatible with the Dragonfly OPTIS imaging catheter and PressureWire fractional flow reserve measurement systems; and the JETi peripheral thrombectomy systems for clot removal; structural heart products, including MitraClip , a transcatheter mitral valve repair system; Trifecta Valve with Glide Technology, a surgical tissue heart valve; Portico and Navitor transcatheter aortic heart valves; Regent mechanical heart valve s ; Amplatzer PFO occluders; Amplatzer Amulet occluder devices; the Tendyne Transcatheter Mitral Valve Implantation (TMVI) system; and the TriClip Transcatheter Tricuspid Valve Repair System; continuous glucose and blood glucose monitoring systems, including test strips, sensors, data management decision software, and accessories for people with diabetes, under the FreeStyle brand such as the FreeStyle Libre system; and neuromodulation products, including spinal cord stimulators Proclaim Elite and Proclaim XR Recharge free implantable pulse generators (IPG) and Prodigy MRI IPG, each with BurstDR stimulation, and Proclaim DRG IPG, a neurostimulation device designed for dorsal root ganglion therapy, for the treatment of chronic pain disorders; and the Infinity Deep Brain Stimulation System with directional lead technology for the treatment of movement disorders. These products are subject to competition in technological innovation, price, convenience of use, service, product performance, long term supply contracts, and product potential for overall cost effectiveness and productivity gains. Some products in this segment can be subject to rapid product obsolescence or regulatory changes. Although Abbott has benefited from technological advantages of certain of its current products, these advantages may be reduced or eliminated as competitors introduce new products. 3 INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO ABBOTT S BUSINESS IN GENERAL Sources and Availability of Raw Materials Abbott purchases, in the ordinary course of business, raw materials and supplies essential to Abbott operations from numerous suppliers in the United States and around the world. Due to disruptions to the global supply chain caused in part by the COVID 19 pandemic, Abbott has experienced availability issues with some materials and electronic comp1nts. To date, Abbott has been able to manage these challenges without significant supply disruptions or shortages for raw materials and supplies. A more detailed discussion on the COVID 19 pandemic disruption of the global supply chain and its resulting impact on Abbott business is contained in Abbott is subject to risks related to public health crises, such as widespread outbreaks of infectious diseases like the COVID 19 pandemic. in Economic and Industry Risk under Item 1A. Risk Factors. Patents, Trademarks, and Licenses Abbott is aware of the desirability for patent and trademark protection for its products. Accordingly, where possible, patents and trademarks are sought and obtained for Abbott products in the United States and countries of interest to Abbott. Abbott owns or has licenses under a substantial number of patents and patent applications. Principal trademarks and the products they cover are discussed in the Narrative Description of Business on pages 1 through 3 These, and various patents which expire during the period 2022 to 2042, in the aggregate, are believed to be of material importance in the operation of Abbott business. Abbott believes that no single patent, license, or trademark is material in relation to Abbott business as a whole. Seasonal Aspects, Customers, and Renegotiation There are no significant seasonal aspects to Abbott business. Abbott has no single customer that, if the customer were lost, would have a material adverse effect on Abbott. No material portion of Abbott business is subject to renegotiation of profits or termination of contracts at the election of a government. Environmental Matters Abbott believes that its operations comply in all material respects with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection. Regulations under federal, state, and various other countries environmental laws impose stringent limitations on emissions and discharges to the environment from various manufacturing operations. Abbott capital and operating expenditures for pollution control in 2021 were not material and are not expected to be material in 2022 Abbott has been identified as 1 of many potentially responsible parties in investigations and or remediations at several locations in the United States, including Puerto Rico, under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund. Abbott is also engaged in remediation at several other sites, some of which are owned by Abbott, in cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency or similar agencies. While it is not feasible to predict with certainty the final costs related to those investigations and remediation activities, Abbott believes that such costs, together with other expenditures to maintain compliance with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection, should not have a material adverse effect on Abbott financial position, cash flows, or results of operations. Human Capital The sustainability of Abbott business depends on attracting, engaging and developing talented people with diverse backgrounds who share Abbott mission to help people live their healthiest possible lives. Abbott provides its employees opportunities to grow and develop their careers, market competitive compensation and benefit programs, and the satisfaction of being part of a global company dedicated to improving health in more than 160 countries. As of December 31, 2021, Abbott employed approximately 113,000 people, 70% of whom were employed outside of the U.S. Women represented 47% of Abbott U.S. workforce, 45% of its global workforce, and 40% of its managers. Health and Safety The health, safety and wellness of its employees is an Abbott priority embedded at every level of its business. Abbott integrated Environmental, Health and Safety organization governs health, safety and wellness at Abbott facilities. Abbott also maintains global policies and standards for managing employee health and safety. 4 Abbott takes a holistic approach to employee well being. Abbott global wellness programs are designed to meet the unique needs of employees across businesses and geographies and offer a wide range of programs, including supporting the mental, financial and physical health of employees and their families. For example, for over 20 years, Abbott has annually offered Exercise Across Abbott, which is a four week physical wellness program that encourages employees to team up with colleagues and track how many minutes they exercise each day. Over 21,000 Abbott employees across 73 countries took n 2021 During the COVID 19 pandemic, Abbott has taken aggressive steps to limit exposure and enhance the safety of facilities for its employees, including providing and requiring the use of personal protective equipment and at many facilities, providing vaccinations, providing and requiring onsite COVID 19 testing, and implementing social distancing. In some locations, employees also have received free over the counter COVID 19 tests for at home use. Talent Management Abbott has an integrated global talent management process that is designed to identify and assess talent across the organization and provide equal and consistent opportunities for employees to develop their skills. All levels of employees participate in Abbott annual performance management process to create development plans that support their particular career objectives, and Abbott provides a broad range of training, mentoring and other development opportunities to help its employees meet these objectives. The board of directors conducts an annual Talent Management Review, focusing on development of talent, diversity, and succession planning for critical positions. Similar reviews take place at every level of Abbott to develop talent and diversity across the organization. Diversity and Inclusion Abbott is committed to developing a workplace that is inclusive for all. Abbott ties executive compensation to human capital management, including diversity outcomes, to sustain an inclusive culture and the fair and balanced treatment of Abbott employees. In 2021, Abbott issued its first ever diversity, equity, and inclusion report, which describes Abbott plans, strategies, and actions to fulfill its commitment to develop an inclusive workplace. Abbott employee ne2rks play an important role in building an inclusive culture across all Abbott operations. A member of Abbott senior management serves as a sponsor for each of these ne2rks, helping to align their objectives with Abbott business strategies. Abbott has ten such ne2rks, which are Advancing Professionals Ne2rk (supporting early career employees), Asian Leadership and Cultural Ne2rk, Black Business Ne2rk, Flex Ne2rk (supporting employees with part time and flexible schedules), LA VOICE Ne2rk (supporting Hispanic and Latino employees), disABILITY Ne2rk (supporting people with disabilities), PRIDE (supporting LGBTQ employees), Veterans Ne2rk, Women Leaders of Abbott, and Women in STEM. All Abbott employees are encouraged to join any of the employee ne2rks. Abbott offers professional development programs, which provide recent college graduates the opportunity to rotate through different areas of Abbott, often with the chance to work outside their home country. In 2021, 50% of the participants were women. Also, Abbott hosts hundreds of college students for paid internships. In 2021, 58% of the U.S. interns were women and 48% were minorities. Further, Abbott has offered a STEM internship program for high school students in the U.S. since 2012 and beginning in 2021, students who complete the program are eligible to receive college credit for their experience. The program objective is to increase the number of students pursuing STEM related careers and contribute to a more diverse talent pipeline for Abbott. In 2021, 62% of the STEM interns were women and 68% were minorities. Compensation and Benefits Abbott is committed to building, retaining, and motivating a diverse talent pipeline that can meet the current and future needs of its businesses. To that end, Abbott provides market competitive compensation, healthcare benefits, continuing education benefits, pension and or retirement savings plans, financial support for employees with student loan debt, and several programs to facilitate employees building an ownership stake in Abbott, including a global long term incentive program for employees generally beginning at the manager level. Abbott also has procedures and processes focused on ensuring employees receive equitable compensation, regardless of race or gender or other personal characteristics. 5 Regulation The development, manufacture, marketing, sale, promotion, and distribution of Abbott products are subject to comprehensive government regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and similar international regulatory agencies. Government regulation by various international, supranational, federal and state agencies addresses (among other matters) the development and approval to market Abbott products, as well as the inspection of, and controls over, research and laboratory procedures, clinical investigations, product approvals and manufacturing, labeling, packaging, supply chains, marketing and promotion, pricing and reimbursement, sampling, distribution, quality control, post market surveillance, record keeping, storage, and disposal practices. In addition, Abbott clinical laboratories and associated testing services are subject to comprehensive government regulation, including registration, certification, and licensure, by federal, state, and local agencies, such as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and their respective foreign counterparts. Certain of these agencies require our clinical laboratories to meet quality assurance, quality control, and personnel standards and undergo inspections. During the COVID 19 public health emergency, many pandemic related products (including diagnostic tests) were authorized by regulators for emergency use solely during the pandemic. In addition, many governments enacted policies to expedite or promote access to health care in order to slow or stop the spread of the virus. Examples include expansion of telehealth coverages and increased reimbursements for diagnostic testing. It is uncertain when the public health emergency will end and to what extent these policies will continue or revert back to previous policies. Abbott international operations are also affected by trade and investment regulations in many countries. These may require local investment, restrict Abbott investments, or limit the import of raw materials and finished products. Abbott laboratory facilities, home monitoring services,and durable medical equipment suppliers, which provide services, related products and medical devices to consumers, are subject to additional laws and regulations applicable to health care providers and suppliers that submit claims for reimbursement to third party payors. In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and other third party payors may from time to time conduct inquiries, claims audits, investigations, and enforcement actions relating to the claims or enrollment criteria. Abbott is subject to laws and regulations pertaining to health care fraud and abuse, including state and federal anti kickback, anti self referral, and false claims laws in the United States. Prescription drug, nutrition, and medical device manufacturers such as Abbott are also subject to taxes, as well as application, product, user, establishment, and other fees. Governmental agencies can also invalidate intellectual property rights. Compliance with these laws and regulations is costly and materially affects Abbott business. Among other effects, health care regulations and significant changes thereto (such as the introduction of the Medical Device Regulation and the In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Device Regulation in the European Union) substantially increase the time, difficulty, and costs incurred in developing, obtaining and maintaining approval to market, and marketing newly developed and existing products. Abbott expects this regulatory environment will continue to require significant technical expertise and investment to ensure compliance. Failure to comply can delay the release of a new product or result in regulatory and enforcement actions, the seizure or recall of a product, the suspension or revocation of the authority necessary for a product production and sale, suspension or revocation of billing privileges, and other civil or criminal sanctions, including fines and penalties. Similarly, compliance with the laws and regulations governing clinical laboratories and testing services requires specialized expertise. Failure to comply with these regulatory requirements can result in sanctions, including suspension, revocation, or limitation of a laboratory certification, which is necessary to conduct business, as well as significant fines or criminal penalties. Abbott business can also be affected by ongoing studies of the utilization, safety, efficacy, and outcomes of health care products and their comp1nts that are regularly conducted by industry participants, government agencies, and others. These studies can call into question the utilization, safety, and efficacy of previously marketed products. In some cases, these studies have resulted, and may in the future result, in the discontinuation of marketing of such products in 1 or more countries, and may give rise to claims for damages from persons who believe they have been injured as a result of their use. 6 Access to human health care products continues to be a subject of investigation and action by governmental agencies, legislative bodies, and private organizations in many countries. A major focus is cost containment. Efforts to reduce health care costs are also being made in the private sector, notably by health care payors and providers, which have instituted various cost reduction and containment measures. Abbott expects insurers and providers will continue attempts to reduce the cost or utilization of health care products. Many countries control the price of health care products directly or indirectly, through reimbursement, payment, pricing, or coverage limitations. Budgetary pressures on health care payors may also heighten the scope and severity of pricing pressures on Abbott products for the foreseeable future. In the United States, the federal government regularly evaluates reimbursement for medical devices, diagnostics, supplies, and other products, as well as the procedures in which these products may be used. The government follows a diagnosis related group (DRG) payment system for certain institutional services provided under Medicare or Medicaid and has implemented a prospective payment system (PPS) for services delivered in hospital outpatient, nursing home, and home health settings. DRG and PPS entitle a health care facility to a fixed reimbursement based on the diagnosis and or procedure rather than actual costs incurred in patient treatment, thereby increasing the incentive for the facility to limit or control expenditures for many health care products. Other payment methodology changes have been proposed and implemented from time to time. For example, Medicare implemented a competitive bidding system for certain durable medical equipment (including diabetes products), enteral nutrition products, and supplies. Additionally, the Protecting Access to Medicare Act established a new payment system for clinical laboratory tests in 2018. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the Affordable Care Act) includes provisions known as the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, which requires manufacturers of drugs, devices, and medical supplies covered under Medicare and Medicaid to record any transfers of value to physicians and teaching hospitals and to report this data to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services for subsequent public disclosure. In October 2018, the Substance Use Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for Patients and Communities Act significantly expanded the types of healthcare providers for which reporting is required, beginning with reports filed in 2022 Similar reporting requirements have also been enacted on the state level domestically, and an increasing number of governments worldwide either have adopted or are considering similar laws requiring transparency of interactions with health care professionals. Failure to report appropriate data may result in civil or criminal fines and or penalties. Policy changes or implementation of new health care legislation could result in significant changes to health care systems. In the United States, this could include potential modification, including expansion or repeal of all or parts of the Affordable Care Act. The regulation of data privacy and security, and the protection of the confidentiality of certain personal information (including patient health information, financial information and other sensitive personal information), is increasing. For example, the European Union, China, various other countries, and various U.S. states (e.g., California, Virginia, and Colorado) have enacted data protection laws that contain significant compliance obligations and financial penalties for noncompliance. In addition, regulators with general consumer protection authority, such as the Federal Trade Commission and U.S. states Attorneys General, are focused on how consumer data is used by entities in the health care industry. Further, there are regulations of data privacy and security that are specific to health care companies. For example, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has issued rules governing the use, disclosure, and security of protected health information, and the FDA has issued further guidance concerning cybersecurity for medical devices. In addition, certain countries have issued or are considering data localization laws, which limit companies ability to transfer protected data across country borders. Failure to comply with data privacy and security laws and regulations can result in business disruption and enforcement actions, which could include civil or criminal penalties. Transferring and managing protected information will become more challenging as laws and regulations are enacted or amended, and Abbott expects there will be increasing complexity in this area. Governmental cost containment efforts also affect Abbott nutritional products business. In the United States, for example, under regulations governing the federally funded Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, all states must have a cost containment program for infant formula. As a result, through competitive bidding states obtain rebates from manufacturers of infant formula whose products are used in the program. Abbott expects debate to continue at all government levels worldwide over the manufacture, quality assurance requirements, marketing authorization processes, post market surveillance requirements, availability, method of delivery, and payment for health care products and services, as well as data privacy and security. Abbott believes that future legislation and regulation in the markets it serves could affect the timing and expense associated with bringing health care products or services to market, access to health care products and services, increase rebates, reduce prices or reimbursements or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, change health care delivery systems, create new fees and obligations for the pharmaceutical, nutrition, diagnostic, and medical device industries, or require additional reporting and disclosure. It is not possible to predict the extent to which Abbott or the health care industry in general might be affected by the matters discussed above. 7 INTERNET INFORMATION Copies of Abbott Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available free of charge through Abbott investor relations website ( www.abbottinvestor.com ) as soon as reasonably practicable after Abbott electronically files the material with, or furnishes it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission (the Commission). These reports and other information are also available, free of charge, at www.sec.gov. Abbott corporate governance guidelines, outline of directorship qualifications, code of business conduct and the charters of Abbott audit committee, compensation committee, nominations and governance committee, and public policy committee are all available on Abbott investor relations website ( www.abbottinvestor.com ). 8 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information in this report, the following risk factors should be considered before deciding to invest in any of Abbott securities. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to Abbott, or risks Abbott currently considers immaterial, could also affect Abbott actual results. Abbott business, financial condition, results of operations, or prospects could be materially adversely affected by any of these risks. Business and Operational Risks Abbott may acquire other businesses, license rights to technologies or products, form alliances, or dispose of or spin off businesses, which could cause it to incur significant expenses and could negatively affect profitability. Abbott may pursue acquisitions, licensing arrangements, and strategic alliances, or dispose of or spin off some of its businesses, as part of its business strategy. Abbott may not complete these transactions in a timely manner, on a cost effective basis, or at all, and may not realize the expected benefits. If Abbott is successful in making an acquisition, the products and technologies that are acquired may not be successful or may require significantly greater resources and investments than originally anticipated. Abbott may not be able to integrate acquisitions successfully into its existing business or transition disposed businesses efficiently, and could incur or assume significant debt and unknown or contingent liabilities. Abbott could also experience negative effects on its reported results of operations from acquisition or disposition related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles and charges for impairment of long term assets. These effects could cause a deterioration of Abbott credit rating, result in increased borrowing costs and interest expense, and decrease liquidity. Abbott depends on sophisticated information technology systems and maintains protected personal data, and a cyber attack or other breach affecting these information technology systems or protected data could have a material adverse effect on Abbott results of operations. Similar to other large multi national companies, the size and complexity of the information technology systems on which Abbott relies for both its infrastructure and products makes them susceptible to a cyber attack, malicious intrusion, breakdown, destruction, loss of data privacy, or other significant disruption. These systems have been and are expected to continue to be the target of malware and other cyber attacks. In addition, third party hacking attempts may cause Abbott information technology systems and related products, protected data, or proprietary information to be compromised or stolen. A significant attack or other disruption could result in adverse consequences, including increased costs and expenses, manufacturing challenges or disruption, problems with product functionality, damage to customer relations, reputational damage, lost revenue, and legal or regulatory penalties. Abbott also collects, manages and processes protected personal data, including protected health information, in connection with certain medical products and service offerings. Abbott is subject to certain regional and local data protection laws that prohibit or restrict the transfer of protected data across country borders. For additional information concerning data privacy and security regulation, see the discussion in Regulation under Item 1, Business. A breach of protected personal information could result in adverse consequences, including regulatory inquiries or litigation, increased costs and expenses, reputational damage, lost revenue, and fines or penalties. Abbott invests in its systems and technology and in the protection of its products and data to reduce the risk of an attack or other significant disruption, and monitors its systems on an ongoing basis for any current or potential threats or vulnerabilities and for changes in technology and the regulatory environment. There can be no assurance that these measures and efforts will prevent future attacks or other significant disruptions to any of the systems on which Abbott relies or that related product issues will not arise in the future. Similarly, there can be no assurance that third party information technology providers with whom Abbott contracts will not suffer a significant attack or disruption that impacts customers like Abbott. Any significant breach, attack or other disruption involving Abbott systems or products could have a material adverse effect on Abbott business. 9 Abbott research and development efforts may not succeed in developing commercially successful products and technologies, which may cause Abbott revenue and profitability to decline. To remain competitive, Abbott must continue to launch new products and technologies. To accomplish this, Abbott commits substantial efforts, funds, and other resources to research and development. A risk of failure is inherent in the research and development of new products and technologies. Abbott must make ongoing substantial expenditures without any assurance that its efforts will be commercially successful. Failure can occur at any point in the process, including after significant funds have been invested. Promising new products and technologies may fail to reach the market or may only have limited commercial success because of efficacy or safety concerns, failure to achieve positive clinical outcomes, inability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals, limited scope of approved uses, excessive costs to manufacture, failure to establish or maintain intellectual property rights, or infringement of the intellectual property rights of others. Even if Abbott successfully develops new products or enhancements or new generations of Abbott existing products, they may be quickly rendered obsolete by changing customer preferences, changing industry or regulatory standards, or competitors innovations. Innovations may not be accepted quickly in the marketplace because of, among other things, entrenched patterns of clinical practice or uncertainty over third party reimbursement. Abbott cannot state with certainty when or whether any of its products under development will be launched, whether it will be able to develop, license, or otherwise acquire compounds or products, or whether any products will be commercially successful. Failure to launch successful new products or technologies, or new indications or uses for existing products, may cause Abbott products or technologies to become obsolete, causing Abbott revenues and operating results to suffer. The manufacture of many of Abbott products is a highly exacting and complex process, and if Abbott or 1 of its suppliers encounters problems manufacturing products, Abbott business could suffer. The manufacture of many of Abbott products is a highly exacting and complex process, due in part to strict regulatory requirements. Problems may arise during manufacturing for a variety of reasons, including equipment malfunction, failure to follow specific protocols and procedures, problems with raw materials or the global supply chain, cyber attacks, natural disasters, and environmental factors. In addition, single suppliers are currently used for certain products and materials. If problems arise during the production of a lot or batch of product, those products may have to be discarded. If problems are not discovered before the product is released to the market, recall and product liability costs may also be incurred. Any of these events could, among other things, lead to increased costs, lost revenue, damage to customer relations, time and expense spent investigating the cause and, depending on the cause, similar losses with respect to other lots, batches or products. To the extent Abbott or 1 of its suppliers experiences significant manufacturing problems, this could have a material adverse effect on Abbott revenues and profitability. Abbott has significant indebtedness, which could adversely affect its business, including decreasing its business flexibility. As of December 31, 2021, Abbott's consolidated indebtedness was approximately $18.1 billion. This consolidated indebtedness could have the effect, among other things, of reducing Abbott's flexibility to respond to changing business and economic conditions, and reducing funds available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and other general corporate purposes. Further, Abbott may be required to raise additional financing for working capital, capital expenditures, future acquisitions or other general corporate purposes. Abbott's ability to arrange additional financing or refinancing will depend on, among other factors, Abbott's financial position and performance, as well as prevailing market conditions and other factors beyond Abbott's control. Consequently, Abbott cannot assure that it will be able to obtain additional financing or refinancing on terms acceptable to Abbott or at all, which could adversely impact Abbott's ability to make scheduled payments with respect to its consolidated indebtedness and its profitability and financial condition. Additionally, further borrowing could cause a deterioration of Abbott's credit ratings. Abbott's credit ratings reflect each credit rating agency's then opinion of Abbott's financial strength, operating performance, and ability to meet its debt obligations. Adverse changes in Abbott's credit ratings may result in increased borrowing costs for future long term debt or short term borrowing facilities and may limit financing options, including access to the unsecured borrowing market. Abbott may also be subject to additional restrictive covenants that would reduce flexibility. 10 Legal and Regulatory Risks Abbott is subject to numerous governmental regulations and it can be costly to comply with these regulations and to develop compliant products and processes. Abbott products are subject to rigorous regulation by the FDA and numerous international, supranational, federal, and state authorities. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a drug, medical device, diagnostic product, or nutritional product can be costly and time consuming, and approvals might not be granted for future products, or additional indications or uses of existing products, on a timely basis, if at all. Delays in the receipt of, or failure to obtain, approvals for future products, or new indications and uses, could result in delayed realization of product revenues, reduction in revenues, and substantial additional costs. In addition, no assurance can be given that Abbott will remain in compliance with applicable FDA and other regulatory requirements once approval or marketing authorization has been obtained for a product. These requirements include, among other things, regulations regarding manufacturing practices, product labeling, and advertising and postmarketing reporting, including adverse event reports and field alerts. Many of Abbott facilities and procedures and those of Abbott suppliers are subject to ongoing regulation, including periodic inspection by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Abbott must incur expense and spend time and effort to ensure compliance with these complex regulations. Possible regulatory actions for non compliance could include warning letters, fines, damages, injunctions, civil penalties, recalls, seizures of Abbott products, and criminal prosecution. These actions could result in, among other things, substantial modifications to Abbott business practices and operations; refunds, recalls, or seizures of Abbott products; a total or partial shutdown of production in 1 or more facilities while Abbott or Abbott suppliers remedy the alleged violation; the inability to obtain future pre market approvals or marketing authorizations; and withdrawals or suspensions of current products from the market. Any of these events could disrupt Abbott business and have a material adverse effect on Abbott revenues, profitability and financial condition. Laws and regulations affecting government benefit programs could impose new obligations on Abbott, require Abbott to change its business practices, and restrict its operations in the future. Abbott industry is subject to various international, supranational, federal, and state laws and regulations pertaining to government benefit program reimbursement, price reporting and regulation, and health care fraud and abuse, including anti kickback and false claims laws, and international and individual state laws relating to pricing and sales and marketing practices. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal and or civil sanctions, including, in some instances, substantial fines, imprisonment, and exclusion from participation in government health care programs, including Medicare, Medicaid, and Veterans Administration health programs in the U.S. These laws and regulations are broad in scope and they are subject to evolving interpretations, which could require Abbott to incur substantial costs associated with compliance or to alter 1 or more of its sales or marketing practices. In addition, violations of these laws, or allegations of such violations, could disrupt Abbott business and result in a material adverse effect on Abbott revenues, profitability, and financial condition. Changes in the health care regulatory environment may adversely affect Abbott business. Both in the U.S. and internationally, government authorities may enact changes in regulatory requirements, make legislative or administrative reforms to existing reimbursement programs, make adverse decisions relating to Abbott products coverage or reimbursement, or make changes to patient access to health care, all of which could adversely impact the demand for and usage of Abbott products or the prices that Abbott customers are willing to pay for them. Further, in the U.S., a number of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 address access to health care products and services. These provisions may be modified, expanded, repealed, or otherwise invalidated, in whole or in part. Future rulemaking could affect rebates, prices or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, or required reporting and disclosure. Abbott cannot predict the timing or impact of any future rulemaking or changes in the law. For additional information concerning health care regulation, see the discussion in Regulation under Item 1, Business. The expiration or loss of intellectual property protection and licenses may affect Abbott future revenues and operating income. Many of Abbott businesses rely on patent and trademark and other intellectual property protection. Although most of the challenges to Abbott intellectual property have come from other companies, governments may also challenge intellectual property protections. To the extent Abbott intellectual property is successfully challenged, invalidated, or circumvented or to the extent it does not allow Abbott to compete effectively, Abbott businesses could suffer. To the extent that countries do not enforce Abbott intellectual property rights, Abbott future revenues and operating income could be reduced. Any material litigation regarding Abbott patents and trademarks is described in the section capti1d Legal Proceedings. 11 Significant safety concerns could arise for Abbott products, which could have a material adverse effect on Abbott revenues and financial condition. Health care products typically receive regulatory approval based on data obtained in controlled clinical trials of limited duration. Following regulatory approval, these products will be used over longer periods of time in many patients. Investigators may also conduct additional, and perhaps more extensive, studies. If new safety issues are reported, Abbott may be required to amend the conditions of use for a product. For example, Abbott may be required to provide additional warnings on a product label or narrow its approved intended use, either of which could reduce the product market acceptance. If serious safety issues arise with an Abbott product, sales of the product could be halted by Abbott or by regulatory authorities. Safety issues affecting suppliers or competitors products also may reduce the market acceptance of Abbott products. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, Abbott is the subject of product liability claims and lawsuits alleging that its products or the products of other companies that Abbott promotes have resulted or could result in an unsafe condition for, or injury to, patients. Product liability claims and lawsuits, safety alerts or product recalls, and other allegations of product safety or quality issues, regardless of their validity or ultimate outcome, may have a material adverse effect on Abbott business and reputation and on Abbott ability to attract and retain customers. Consequences may also include additional costs, a decrease in market share for the products, lower income or exposure to other claims. Product liability losses are self insured. Product liability claims could have a material adverse effect on Abbott profitability and financial condition. Economic and Industry Risks Abbott is subject to risks related to public health crises, such as widespread outbreaks of infectious diseases like the COVID 19 pandemic. As a global healthcare company, public health crises, such as the widespread outbreaks of infectious diseases like the COVID 19 pandemic, may negatively impact Abbott's operations. Health concerns and significant changes in political or economic conditions caused by such outbreaks can cause significant reductions in demand for certain products, increased difficulty in serving customers, disrupt manufacturing and supply chains, and negatively affect Abbott operations as well as the operations of its suppliers, distributors and other third party partners. Furthermore, such widespread outbreaks may impact the broader economies of affected countries, including negatively impacting economic growth, the proper functioning of financial and capital markets, foreign currency exchange rates, and interest rates. To date, the COVID 19 pandemic has affected Abbott's diversified health care business in various ways, with some businesses performing at the levels required to successfully meet new demands, other having faced challenges during periods when the number of COVID 19 cases significantly increased, and still others being relatively less impacted by the pandemic. With regard to COVID 19 diagnostic testing, the FDA issued Emergency Use Authorizations (EUAs) for several COVID 19 related products in 2020 and 2021, including Abbott diagnostic tests. EUAs are authorized for the duration of the COVID 19 public health emergency unless so1r terminated or revoked. Abbott is actively pursuing the FDA customary regulatory approval process for various COVID 19 diagnostic tests which has uncertainty as discussed in Abbott is subject to numerous governmental regulations and it can be costly to comply with these regulations and to develop compliant products and processes. in Legal and Regulatory Risks under Item 1A. Risk Factors. Further, the demand for COVID 19 tests has been, and Abbott expects it to continue to be, highly volatile, primarily driven by the emergence and severity of new variants, which are unpredictable. In addition, the COVID 19 pandemic has contributed to global supply chain disruptions, which has adversely impacted the cost and availability of certain raw materials, supplies, and services. While Abbott has taken actions to offset some of these inflationary pressures in its supply chain, Abbott may not be able to completely offset all the increases in its operational costs. Further, Abbott has experienced, and may continue to experience, availability issues with some services and materials used in its products. To date, Abbott has been able to manage these challenges without significant supply disruption or shortage for services, raw materials and supplies, however, no assurance can be given that these efforts will continue to be successful. Significant disruptions or shortages may result in Abbott inability to meet customer demand for certain of its products. Due to the unpredictability of the duration and impact of the current COVID 19 pandemic, the extent to which the COVID 19 pandemic will have a material effect on Abbott business, financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. A more detailed discussion on the impact of the COVID 19 pandemic on Abbott business is contained in the Financial Review section in Item 7, Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of this report. 12 Abbott is subject to cost containment efforts that could cause a reduction in future revenues and operating income. In the United States and other countries, Abbott businesses have experienced downward pressure on product pricing. Cost containment efforts by governments and private organizations are described in greater detail in the section capti1d Regulation. To the extent these cost containment efforts are not offset by greater patient access to health care or other factors, Abbott future revenues and operating income will be reduced. Competitors intellectual property may prevent Abbott from selling its products or have a material adverse effect on Abbott future profitability and financial condition. In the ordinary course of business, Abbott is the subject of patent litigation, such as competitor claims that an Abbott product infringes their intellectual property. Resolving an intellectual property infringement claim can be costly and time consuming and may require Abbott to enter into license agreements. Abbott cannot guarantee that it would be able to obtain license agreements on commercially reasonable terms. A successful claim of patent or other intellectual property infringement could subject Abbott to significant damages or an injunction preventing the manufacture, sale or use of affected Abbott products. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on Abbott profitability and financial condition. New products and technological advances by Abbott competitors may negatively affect Abbott results of operations. Abbott products face intense competition from competitive products. Competitors products may be safer, more effective, more effectively marketed or sold, or have lower prices or superior performance features than Abbott products. Abbott cannot predict with certainty the timing or impact of the introduction of competitors products. Fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely affect Abbott financial statements and its ability to realize projected sales and earnings. Although Abbott financial statements are denominated in U.S. dollars, a significant portion of Abbott revenues and costs are realized in other currencies. Sales outside of the United States in 2021 made up approximately 61 percent of Abbott net sales. Abbott profitability is affected by movement of the U.S. dollar against other currencies. Fluctuations in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and other currencies may also affect the reported value of Abbott assets and liabilities, as well as its cash flows. Some foreign currencies are subject to government exchange controls. While Abbott enters into hedging arrangements to mitigate some of its foreign currency exposure, Abbott cannot predict with any certainty changes in foreign currency exchange rates or its ability to mitigate these risks. Information on the impact of foreign exchange rates on Abbott financial results is contained in the Financial Review Results of Operations section in Item 7, Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of this report. A discussion of the steps taken to mitigate the impact of foreign exchange is contained in Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk in Abbott 2021 Form 10 K. Information on Abbott hedging arrangements is contained in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in this report. Deterioration in the economic condition and credit quality of certain countries may negatively affect Abbott results of operations. Unfavorable economic conditions in certain countries may increase the time it takes to collect outstanding trade receivables. Financial instability and fiscal deficits in these countries may result in additional austerity measures to reduce costs, including health care. Deterioration in the quality of sovereign debt, including credit downgrades, could increase Abbott collection risk where a significant amount of Abbott receivables in these countries are with governmental health care systems or where Abbott customers depend on payment by government health care systems. The international nature of Abbott business subjects it to additional business risks that may cause its revenue and profitability to decline. Abbott business is subject to risks associated with managing a global supply chain and doing business internationally. Sales outside of the United States in 2021 made up approximately 61 percent of Abbott net sales. Additional risks associated with Abbott international operations include differing local product preferences and product requirements; trade protection measures, including tariffs, import or export licensing requirements, other governmental restrictions, and changes to international trade agreements; difficulty in establishing, staffing, and managing operations; 13 differing labor regulations; potentially negative consequences from changes in or interpretations of tax laws; political and economic instability, including sovereign debt issues; restrictions on local currency conversion and or cash extraction; price controls, limitations on participation in local enterprises, expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental action; inflation, recession, and fluctuations in interest rates; diminished protection of intellectual property; and potential penalties or other adverse consequences for violations of anti corruption, anti bribery, and other similar laws and regulations, including the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the U.K. Bribery Act. Events contemplated by these risks may, individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on Abbott revenues and profitability. Other factors can have a material adverse effect on Abbott future profitability and financial condition. Many other factors can affect Abbott profitability and its financial condition, including changes in or interpretations of laws and regulations, including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements, product marketing application standards, product labeling standards, source and use laws, and environmental laws; differences between the fair value measurement of assets and liabilities and their actual value, particularly for pensions, retiree health care, stock compensation, intangibles, goodwill, and contingent consideration; and for contingent liabilities such as litigation, the absence of a recorded amount, or an amount recorded at the minimum, compared to the actual amount; changes in the rate of inflation (including the cost of raw materials, commodities, and supplies), interest rates, market value of Abbott equity investments, and the performance of investments held by Abbott or Abbott employee benefit trusts; changes in the credi2rthiness of counterparties that transact business with or provide services to Abbott or Abbott employee benefit trusts; changes in business, economic, and political conditions, including war, political instability, terrorist attacks, the threat of future terrorist activity and related military action; global climate change, extreme weather and natural disasters; the cost and availability of insurance due to any of the foregoing events; labor disputes, strikes, slow downs, or other forms of labor or union activity; and pressure from third party interest groups; changes in Abbott business units and investments and changes in the relative and absolute contribution of each to earnings and cash flow resulting from evolving business strategies, changing product mix, changes in tax laws or tax rates both in the U.S. and abroad and opportunities existing now or in the future; changes in the buying patterns of a major distributor, retailer,wholesaler, or other customer resulting from buyer purchasing decisions, pricing, seasonality, or other factors, or other problems with licensors, suppliers, distributors, and business partners; and legal difficulties, any of which could preclude or delay commercialization of products or adversely affect profitability, including claims asserting statutory or regulatory violations, and adverse litigation decisions. 14 CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS This Form 10 K contains forward looking statements that are based on management current expectations, estimates, and projections. Words such as expects, anticipates, intends, plans, believes, seeks, estimates, forecasts, variations of these words, and similar expressions are intended to identify these forward looking statements. Certain factors, including but not limited to those identified under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10 K, may cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations, estimates, projections, forecasts, and from past results. No assurance can be made that any expectation, estimate, or projection contained in a forward looking statement will be achieved or will not be affected by the factors cited above or other unknown or future events. Abbott undertakes no obligation to release publicly any revisions to forward looking statements as the result of subsequent events or developments, except as required by law. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
