CIK: 794172
Company Name: MERIDIAN BIOSCIENCE INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2020-11-23
Accession Number: 0001193125-20-300813


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Overview Meridian is a fully integrated life science company with principal businesses in (i) the development, manufacture, sale and distribution of diagnostic test kits, primarily for certain gastrointestinal and respiratory infectious diseases, and elevated blood lead levels; and (ii) the manufacture and distribution of bulk antigens, antibodies, PCR qPCR reagents, nucleotides, and bioresearch reagents used by in vitro diagnostic ( IVD ) manufacturers and researchers in immunological and molecular tests for human, animal, plant and environmental applications. Our website is www.meridianbioscience.com . We make available our Annual Reports on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, Proxy Statements and any amendments thereto, free of charge through this website, as soon as reasonably practicable after such material has been electronically filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). The SEC maintains an internet site containing these filings and other information regarding Meridian at www.sec.gov . The information on our website is not and should not be considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Reportable Segments Our reportable segments are Diagnostics and Life Science, both of which are headquartered in Cincinnati, Ohio. We describe these segments in this Business section and in other locations in this report Type of Segment Information Location within Annual Report on Form 10 K Physical locations and activities Item 2 Properties Revenue by geographic region Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition & Results of Operations (hereafter MD&A ) Financial information Note 10 of Consolidated Financial Statements 4 Table of Contents Diagnostics Segment Products and Markets Prior to the current year effects of the COVID 19 pandemic, our largest source of revenues has been clinical diagnostic products, historically representing approximately 2 thirds of our consolidated revenues. However, primarily due to the effects of the pandemic, our Diagnostics segment provided 48% of consolidated net revenues for fiscal 2020. Our clinical diagnostic products provide accuracy, simplicity and speed; enable early diagnosis and treatment of common, acute medical conditions; and provide for better patient outcomes at reduced costs. We target diagnostics for disease states that (i) are conditions where rapid diagnosis impacts patient outcomes; (ii) have opportunistic demographic and disease profiles; (iii) are underserved by current diagnostic products; and or (iv) have difficult sample handling requirements (e.g., stool). This approach has allowed us to establish meaningful market share in our target disease states, gastrointestinal and respiratory illnesses, and tests for elevated lead levels in blood. Our product portfolio includes approximately 150 diagnostic tests and transport media, and is marketed to acute care hospitals, reference laboratories, outpatient clinics and physician office laboratories in over 70 countries around the world. Our testing platforms include Real time PCR Amplification (Revogene brand); Isothermal DNA Amplification (Alethia brand); Lateral Flow Immunoassay using fluorescent chemistry (Curian brand); Rapid Immunoassay (Immuno Card and Immuno Card STAT! brands); Enzyme linked Immunoassay (PREMIER brand); Anodic Stripping Voltammetry (LeadCare and Pediastat brands); and urea breath testing for H. pylori (BreathID brand). Our research and development programs are focused on menu expansion for our Curian and Revogene instrument platforms, with disease targets in the gastrointestinal and respiratory areas, as well as next generation blood chemistry testing. Over the next 12 months, we intend to submit to the FDA at least six new products across both the Curian and Revogene instrument platforms. These new products include the following Curian Campylobacter, EHEC Shiga Toxins and C. difficile combo common antigen and Toxins A and B; Revogene SARS CoV 2 (emergency use authorization), gastrointestinal panel and respiratory panel. Although at an earlier stage in our research and development program, we are also exploring the merits and viability of a liver function test on the BreathID system. We are also pursuing opportunities to complement our internal research and development programs by securing rights to finished diagnostics tests. Our arrangement with GenBody for access to its rapid antigen SARS CoV 2 test is a recent example of this pursuit. The 2019 acquisition of the GenePOC business and the Revogene platform refreshed our molecular diagnostics product portfolio, stabilized our molecular customer base and provided menu expansion opportunities for RNA based tests and small to mid sized multi target panels. This year acquisition of Exalenz Bioscience Ltd. ( Exalenz ) and the BreathID system strengthened our position in H. pylori testing, as it gives us a second non invasive test (in addition to stool antigen testing). Market Trends Despite the effects of the global COVID 19 pandemic and the near term focus on SARS CoV 2 testing, we believe the global market for infectious disease tests continues to expand as new disease states are identified, new therapies become available, and worldwide standards of living and access to health care improve. There is a continuing shift from conventional testing to more technologically advanced testing, which can be performed by less highly trained personnel and completed in minutes or hours. The growing global pressures to contain total health care costs have accelerated the increased use of diagnostic testing. Integrated Delivery Ne2rks ( IDNs ) in our U.S. market have the goal of increasing the efficiency of health care delivery, reducing spending and improving clinical outcomes. We believe our product portfolio positions us competitively with IDNs and health care systems that are transitioning from fee for service compensation models to value based reimbursement. We also continue to see aggregation of buying power in our U.S. market via multi hospital group purchasing organizations and IDNs, consolidation among reference laboratories, hospital laboratories being operated by large reference laboratories, and acquisition of physician practices by hospitals, health systems and for profit specialty health care companies. 5 Table of Contents Cost containment pressures have also affected health care systems outside the U.S., particularly in Europe, where the health care systems are generally government run. The level of government budget deficits can have an adverse effect on the amount of government health care spend. Sales, Marketing and Distribution Our Diagnostics segment relies on direct sales personnel and independent distribution ne2rks. We have a direct sales force in four countries, covering the United States and certain major markets in the EMEA region. We also use independent distributors either in a complementary manner with our direct sales force (e.g., the United States) or solely to supply our products to end users. 2 independent distribution customers in the United States have historically significantly contributed to our revenues, comprising 21% of consolidated revenues as recently as fiscal 2018. Competition Our major competitors in molecular diagnostics are Cepheid (a Danaher business) and Becton Dickinson, both of which have systems with multiple assay menus. We also face competition in molecular diagnostics, but to a lesser degree, from companies such as Abbott (former Alere business) and Quidel. Our major competitors in rapid immunoassay diagnostics are primarily Abbott (former Alere business) and Quidel. In recent years, companies such as bioMerieux have captured market share in our gastrointestinal category via its BioFire multi plex panel tests. However, since their introduction to the market, payors have raised concerns over reimbursement levels relative to clinical utility, particularly for panels with 12 or more targets. For blood lead testing, we believe we have the only FDA cleared, CLIA waived point of care test available commercially. Other blood lead testing systems in use, marketed by our competitors, include Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy, which requires a highly skilled technician and larger laboratory space to operate, in addition to not being portable or suitable for point of care use. Our major competitor for urea breath testing for H. pylori is Otsuka, a pharmaceutical company that also markets and sells a urea breath testing system. We believe that our BreathID system has a competitive advantage in that it (i) has substantially higher sensitivity and specificity; (ii) has a shorter processing time; (iii) offers full automation; and (iv) connects directly to lab information systems. We believe that with the breadth and depth of our product portfolio, we are well positi1d for the clinical laboratory. Research and Development Our Diagnostics segment research and development personnel are organized into 3 pre clinical teams immunoassay, PCR based molecular and blood chemistry. We have a separate team responsible for execution of clinical trials across all 3 pre clinical programs. Our research and development activities are focused on new product and new technology development, new applications for our existing technologies, and improvements to existing products, including assay menu expansion. Research and development efforts may occur in house or with collaborative partners. We believe that new product development is a key source for sustaining revenue growth. The products within our Revogene and Alethia molecular platforms, H. pylori product family and blood lead testing family were developed in house. See Operating Expenses section within MD&A on page 31 Manufacturing Our Diagnostics tests are manufactured at four principal sites in Billerica, Massachusetts (blood chemistry); Cincinnati, Ohio (immunoassays and molecular tests); Modi in, Israel, (urea breath tests for H. pylori ); and Quebec City, Quebec, Canada (molecular tests). Our immunoassay and molecular assay products require the production of highly specialized reagents, primers and enzymes, and our BreathID system requires the production of urea in pharmaceutical grade form. We produce the vast majority of our own immunoassay requirements. Reagents, primers and enzymes for our Revogene molecular assay products, primers for our Alethia molecular assay products, and urea for our BreathID system are purchased from outside vendors. Our blood lead testing products require the production of electrical chemical sensors, which we manufacture using critical raw materials purchased from outside vendors. 6 Table of Contents Intellectual Property, Patents and Licenses We own or license U.S. and foreign patents, most of which are for select products manufactured by our Diagnostics segment. These patents are used in our manufacturing processes for select products (e.g., method patents) or may relate to the design of the test device technology format (e.g., design patents). In the absence of patent protection, we may be vulnerable to competitors who successfully replicate our production and manufacturing technologies and processes. Our employees are required to sign confidentiality and non disclosure agreements designed to protect our proprietary products. The patents for our Alethia products, which represented 9%, 13% and 16% of consolidated revenues for fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, are licensed from a third party, Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., under a non exclusive license agreement and expire between 2020 and 2022 These patents were issued in the U.S., European Union and other countries. The term of our license agreement runs until the last patent expires in 2022, at which point we will be free to practice the patents without any restriction or royalty obligation. The patents for the Revogene platform and related products acquired as part of the GenePOC business are either wholly owned or licensed from 2 third parties, Laval University and The Regents of California, under an exclusive license agreement. These patents are issued in the U.S., European Union and other countries. The term of our exclusive license agreement and the related patents currently runs through June 15, 2034, after which we will be free to practice the patents without any restriction or royalty obligation. For a description of our acquisition of the GenePOC business, see Note 2 of the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. The patents for the BreathID system and related urea breath test for H. pylori are either wholly owned or licensed from a third party, Oridion Medical 1987 Ltd., under an exclusive, royalty free, license agreement. The licensed and wholly owned patents are issued in the U.S., European Union, Israel, Japan, Australia and China. The wholly owned patents have varying expiration dates, with the last being in 2033 The patents for our stool antigen H. pylori products, owned by us and which represented approximately 10%, 16% and 16% of consolidated revenues for fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, expired in May 2016 in the U.S. and in May 2017 in countries outside the U.S. We expect competition with respect to our stool antigen H. pylori products to continue to increase, and such competition may have an adverse impact on our selling prices for these products, or our ability to retain business at prices acceptable to us, and consequently, adversely affect our future results of operations and liquidity, including revenues and gross profit. We have executed on a number of measures to address competitive pressures in coming off patent including (i) in October 2018, we entered into a strategic collaboration with DiaSorin to sell H. pylori tests; (ii) we have executed multi year supply agreements with our 2 largest reference laboratory customers for H. pylori tests to secure volume, albeit at lower selling prices; and (iii) upon FDA clearance in March 2020, we launched Curian HpSA, our first assay on the new Curian platform, which we expect will help protect our existing customer base using lateral flow tests. We also expect the acquisition of the Exalenz BreathID platform to combat competitive pressures, as we believe that we are now the only company with FDA cleared, non invasive assays for both stool antigen and urea breath samples, allowing physicians a choice in test format from a single supplier. We are unable to provide assurances that we will be successful with any strategy or that any strategy will prevent an adverse effect on our future results of operations and liquidity, including revenues and gross profit. Government Regulation Our diagnostic products are regulated by the FDA as devices pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act ( FDCA ). Under the FDCA, medical devices are classified into 1 of 3 classes (i.e., Class I, II or III). Class I and II devices are not expressly approved by the FDA, but, instead, are cleared for marketing. Class III devices generally must receive pre market approval from the FDA as to safety and effectiveness. Our diagnostics manufacturing facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the FDA. See page 28 within MD&A for discussion regarding the FDA inspection of our Billerica facility. Each of the diagnostic products currently marketed by us in the United States has been cleared by the FDA pursuant to the 510(k) clearance process or is exempt from such requirements. We believe that most, but not all (e.g., liver function test on the BreathID system in development, a Class III medical device), products under development will be classified as Class I or II medical devices and, in the case of most of our Class I and all Class II devices, will be eligible for 510(k) clearance; however, we can make no assurances in this regard. Our urea breath test for H. pylori on the BreathID system was cleared as a Class I medical device since the urea drug comp1nt was approved by the FDA separately via the New Drug Application process. Our SARS CoV 2 test on the Revogene platform is expected to be submitted to the FDA under its emergency use authorization program in late November or early December 2020. We notified the FDA of our intent to submit for emergency use authorization on November 13, 2020. 7 Table of Contents Sales of our diagnostic products in foreign countries are subject to foreign government regulation, which is similar to that of the FDA. Our Diagnostics facilities are certified to ISO 134852016. Following a five year transition period, sales of our diagnostic tests in the European Union will be subject to new regulations under the In Vitro Diagnostics Regulation of 2017 ( IVDR ) beginning in May 2022 IVDR replaces the previous IVD Regulation (98 79 EC). We have begun our assessment regarding which products will not be sellable under IVDR and the revenue associated with these products is not expected to be material. Our principal business is the sale of a broad range of clinical diagnostic test kits for common gastrointestinal and respiratory infectious diseases, and elevated blood lead levels. Certain infectious diseases may be seasonal in nature, while others may be associated with sporadic outbreaks, such as foodborne illnesses or pandemics such as an influenza outbreak or the current COVID 19 pandemic. While we believe that the breadth of our diagnostic product lines normally reduces the risk that infections subject to seasonality and sporadic outbreaks will cause significant variability in diagnostic revenues, the current COVID 19 pandemic did result in a significant decline in our Diagnostics revenues during the second half of fiscal 2020. Accordingly, we can make no assurance that revenues will not be impacted period over period by such factors. Life Science Segment Products and Markets Our Life Science segment develops, manufactures, sells and distributes bulk antigens, antibodies, PCR qPCR reagents, nucleotides, and bioresearch reagents used predominantly by IVD manufacturing companies, and to a lesser degree, by researchers and non human clinical customers. The COVID 19 pandemic has provided the opportunity for our Life Science segment to showcase the breadth of its reagent products across not only SARS CoV 2 testing platforms (molecular, rapid antigen and serology), but also RNA and DNA based molecular tests for nearly any infectious disease. For fiscal 2020, approximately 85% of Life Science revenues were generated from the industrial market, defined as IVD manufacturers, and reagents for use in SARS CoV 2 tests contributed approximately $71,500 in new revenues. We engage direct sales teams in the U.S., the U.K., France, Germany, China and Australia. During fiscal 2020, 27% of third party revenues for this segment were from 3 IVD manufacturing customers. Our Life Science products are marketed to IVD manufacturing customers as a source of raw materials for their human clinical diagnostics tests, or as an outsourced step in their manufacturing processes. We seek and maintain multi year supply arrangements to provide stability in volumes and pricing. Independent distributors market our molecular biology products to academic research customers. These products are used in measuring DNA and RNA in human, animal, plant and environmental applications. Market Trends Major IVD manufacturing customers often have global footprints, where we are supplying reagents to specific manufacturing sites around the world. IVD manufacturers in specific countries of the Asia Pacific region (e.g., China) are increasing their efforts in the development and manufacturing of infectious disease tests. We intend to use the breadth of our product portfolio, particularly molecular reagents, to increase the penetration of our products in IVD manufacturing customers tests, regardless of customer class (large multi national companies or regional companies). Competition The market for bulk biomedical reagents is highly competitive with respect to product quality, price, customer service and reputation. Our competitors often have greater financial, research and development, sales and marketing, and manufacturing resources. Customers also may choose to manufacture their biomedical reagents in house rather than purchase from us. 8 Table of Contents Research and Development Our research and development activities for the Life Science segment focus on improving molecular reagents, including DNA and RNA master mixes. For example, our Life Science segment introduced a family of lyophilization ready reagents that have a number of advantages over prior generation wet reagents (e.g., room temperature shipping and storage and longer shelf life). See Operating Expenses section within MD&A on page 31 Manufacturing and Government Regulation Our Life Science facilities are ISO 134852016 certified. Additionally, where appropriate, our Life Science facilities comply with Regulation EC 10692009. International Markets International markets are an important source of revenues and future growth opportunities for both of our segments. For both segments combined, revenues from customers located outside of the United States and its territories approximated $122,000 or 48% of consolidated fiscal 2020 revenues, $74,000 or 37% of consolidated fiscal 2019 revenues, and $71,000 or 33% of consolidated fiscal 2018 revenues. For our Life Science segment, the COVID 19 pandemic resulted in the significantly higher percentage of international revenues for fiscal 2020. We expect to continue to look to key European markets as a source of revenue growth in the future for both business units. For the Life Science segment, we have also focused resources on IVD manufacturing customers in China. To date, we have not experienced any adverse effects from the trade tensions between the United States and China, but we cannot be sure that we will not experience any adverse effects in the future. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates since fiscal 2019 had an approximate $1,250 unfavorable impact on fiscal 2020 revenues; $150 within the Diagnostics segment and $1,100 within the Life Science segment. This compares to year to year currency exchange rates having an approximate $2,200 unfavorable impact on revenues in fiscal 2019; $1,150 within the Diagnostics segment and $1,050 within the Life Science segment. Environmental We are in compliance with applicable portions of the federal and state hazardous waste regulations and have never been a party to any environmental proceeding. Human Capital As of September 30, 2020, our Diagnostics segment had approximately 560 employees in ten countries and our Life Science segment had approximately 190 employees in seven countries. Approximately 58% of our employees are women. In addition, of our U.S. based employees, which represents approximately 60% of our total worldwide workforce, approximately 23% are ethnically diverse. Below is additional demographic information about our current employee base as of September 30, 2020. Meridian Employees 2020 Salaried workforce 537 Managers and above 157 Part time employees 27 Average age 43 Average length of service in years 7 Employee turnover rate (voluntary) 13 % Fiscal 2020 revenues per employee (in thousands) $ 340 9 Table of Contents Equal Employment Opportunity Table (by number of employees) U.S. Employee Diversity as of September 30, 2020 Job category Gender White Black African American Hispanic Latino Asian American Indian Alaskan Native 2 or more races Total Executive senior level officials and managers Male 11 11 Female 2 1 3 First mid level officials and managers Male 38 3 2 3 46 Female 38 4 2 1 45 Professionals Male 56 2 2 4 1 2 67 Female 67 6 4 8 2 87 All other Male 48 9 5 4 1 67 Female 84 13 7 10 4 118 Total Male 153 14 9 11 1 3 191 Female 191 23 12 20 7 253 We believe that developing a diverse, equitable and inclusive culture is critical to continuing to attract and retain the top talent necessary to deliver on our growth strategy. As such, we are investing in the creation of a work environment where our employees can feel inspired to deliver their workplace best every day. All employees are responsible for upholding the Meridian Values and Meridian Code of Conduct, which form the foundation of our policies and practices. We continue to expand our Human Resources Information System ( HRIS ) and other systems to track key human capital metrics, including workforce demographics, diversity, turnover, engagement and training data. Diversity, Equity and Inclusion A diverse and inclusive workforce is a business imperative and key to our long term success. To champion our efforts in this area, we have recently initiated the 1 Meridian Inclusion Diversity and Equity Team, which is comprised of a group of employees around the world and led by Dr. Lourdes Weltzien, Executive Vice President, Life Science. This team will be developing a mission and a strategy that will look to identify gaps and present suggestions on how we can encourage and enforce an environment in which all employees feel included and empowered to achieve their best. Though we are proud of our efforts in these areas to date, we realize that the voice and ongoing feedback of this newly established team is critical for Meridian to achieve its full potential. Compensation and Benefits We strive to provide pay, benefits, and services that are competitive to market and create incentives to attract and retain employees globally. Our compensation package includes market competitive pay, broad based stock grants and bonuses, health care and retirement benefits, paid time off and family leave, among others, depending upon locale. We are focused on pay equity globally and are striving to close the gap in pay among similar roles and responsibilities throughout our organization, after accounting for legitimate business factors that can explain differences, such as performance, time at grade level, and tenure. We also continue to advance transparency in our pay and representation data by complying with all applicable statutory filing requirements. Communication and Engagement We strongly believe that Meridian success depends on employees understanding how their work contributes to the Company overall strategy. To this end, we utilize a variety of channels to facilitate open and direct communication, including (i) quarterly CEO update videos; (ii) open forums or town hall meetings with executives; (iii) regular ongoing update communications; and (iv) employee engagement surveys. 10 Table of Contents Health, Wellness and Safety We are committed to the safety of our employees and communities, from operations to product development to supplier partnerships. Our ultimate goal is to achieve zero serious injuries through continued investment in and focus on our core safety programs and injury reduction initiatives. We provide access to a variety of innovative, flexible, and convenient health and wellness tools. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information set forth in this report, you should carefully consider the following factors, which could materially affect our business, financial condition, cash flows or future results. Any 1 of these factors could cause our actual results to vary materially from recent results or from anticipated future results. The risks described below are not the only risks facing our company. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us, or that we currently deem to be immaterial, also may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and or operating results. Risks Affecting Growth and Profitability of our Business Our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected by the ongoing coronavirus (COVID 19) outbreak. Any outbreak of contagious diseases, such as COVID 19, or other adverse public health developments, could have material and adverse effects on our business operations. Such adverse effects could include diversion or prioritization of health care resources away from the conduct of diagnostic testing, disruptions of or restrictions on the ability of laboratories to process our tests, and delays with respect to or difficulties in patients accessing our tests, including those resulting from an inability to travel as a result of quarantines or other restrictions resulting from COVID 19. As COVID 19 continues to affect individuals and businesses around the globe, we may experience disruptions that could severely impact our business, including decreased volume of testing and related sales of certain of our Diagnostics products as a result of disruptions to health care providers and limitations on the ability of providers to administer tests; disruptions or restrictions on the ability of the Company s, our collaborators , or our suppliers personnel to travel, and temporary closures of our facilities, or the facilities of our collaborators or suppliers; limitations on employee resources that would otherwise be focused on the development of our products, the processing of our diagnostic tests, and or the conduct of our clinical trials, because of illness of employees or their families, or requirements imposed on employees to avoid contact with large groups of people; and delays in necessary interactions with local regulators, ethics committees, and other important agencies and contractors due to limitations in employee resources or forced furlough of government employees. In addition, the continued spread of COVID 19 globally could adversely affect our manufacturing and supply chains. Parts of our direct and indirect supply chains are located overseas, including in China, and may accordingly be subject to disruption. Additionally, our results of operations could be adversely affected to the extent that COVID 19 or any other epidemic harms our business or the economy in general either domestically or in any other region in which we do business. The extent to which COVID 19 affects our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID 19, and the actions to contain COVID 19 or treat its impact, among others, which could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. To date, we are seeing that the outbreak has slowed our assay instrument placements and sales of related test kits as diagnostic testing sites have turned their attention to critical care testing. We are unable to predict when expected sales volume levels for our instruments and related test kits will return. Also, as a result of the pandemic, certain clinical trials related to our products which were underway or scheduled to begin have been temporarily placed on hold. Such delays will impact our timing for filing applications for product clearances with the FDA, as well as related timing of FDA clearances of such filings. Additionally, the pandemic could slow down our efforts to expand our product portfolio through acquisitions and distribution opportunities, impacting the speed with which we are able to bring additional products to market. 11 Table of Contents If our essential employees who are unable to telework become ill or otherwise incapacitated, our operations may be adversely impacted. Consistent with rapidly changing federal, state and local governmental orders and recommendations, we have implemented telework policies wherever possible for appropriate categories of our employees. Employees that are unable to telework continue to work at our facilities, and we have implemented appropriate safety measures, including social distancing, face covering mandates, temperature checking, and increased sanitation standards in an attempt to maintain the health and safety of our workforce. We are following guidance from the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) regarding suspension of n1ssential travel, self isolation recommendations for employees returning from certain geographic areas, confirmed reports of any COVID 19 diagnosis among our employees, and the return of such employees to our workplace. Pursuant to updated guidance from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, we are engaging in limited and appropriate inquiries of employees regarding potential COVID 19 exposure, based on the direct threat that such exposure may present to our workforce. We continue to address other unique situations that arise among our workforce due to the COVID 19 pandemic on a case by case basis. While we believe that we have taken appropriate measures to ensure the health and wellbeing of our employees, there can be no assurances that our measures will be sufficient to protect our employees in our workplace or that they may not otherwise be exposed to COVID 19 outside of our workplace. If a number of our essential employees become ill, incapacitated or are otherwise unable to continue working during the current or any future epidemic, our operations may be adversely impacted. We may be unable to develop new products and services or acquire products and services on favorable terms. The medical diagnostic and life science industries are characterized by ongoing technological developments and changing customer requirements. As such, our results of operations and continued growth depend, in part, on our ability in a timely manner to develop or acquire rights to, and successfully introduce into the marketplace, enhancements of existing products and services, or new products and services that incorporate technological advances, meet customer requirements and or respond to products developed by our competition. We cannot provide any assurance that we will be successful in developing or acquiring such rights to products and services on a timely basis, or that such products and services will adequately address the changing needs of the marketplace, either of which could adversely affect our results of operations. In addition, we must regularly allocate considerable resources to research and development of new or acquired products, services and technologies, and protecting intellectual property. The research and development process generally takes a significant amount of time from research to product launch. This process is conducted in various stages. During each stage, there is a risk that we will not achieve our goals on a timely basis, or at all, and we may have to abandon a project in which we have invested substantial resources, any of which could adversely affect our results of operations. We may be unable to successfully integrate operations or to achieve expected cost savings from acquisitions we make. 1 of our growth strategies is the acquisition of companies and or products. Although additional acquisitions of companies and products may enhance the opportunity to increase net earnings over time, such acquisitions could result in greater administrative burdens, increased exposure to the uncertainties inherent in marketing new products, financial risks of additional operating costs, disrupted operations, challenges in employee retention, and increased risk of asset impairments if future revenues and cash flows are deficient. The principal benefits expected to result from any acquisitions we make will not be achieved fully unless we are able to successfully integrate the operations of the acquired entities with our operations and realize the anticipated synergies, cost savings and growth opportunities from integrating these businesses into our existing businesses. We cannot provide assurance that we will be able to identify and complete additional acquisitions on terms we consider favorable or that, if completed, will be successfully integrated into our operations. Furthermore, we cannot predict the outcome of goodwill impairment testing and the impact of goodwill impairments on the Company earnings and financial results. 12 Table of Contents Revenues for our Diagnostics segment may be impacted by our reliance upon 2 key distributors in North America, seasonal factors and sporadic outbreaks, and changing diagnostic market conditions. Key Distributors Our Diagnostics segment revenues from sales through 2 U.S. distributors were approximately 23% and 26% of the Diagnostics segment total revenues for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively, or approximately 12% and 18%, respectively, of each fiscal year consolidated revenues. These parties distribute our products and other laboratory products to end user customers. The loss of either of these distributors could negatively impact our revenues and results of operations unless suitable alternatives were timely found or lost sales to 1 distributor were absorbed by another distributor. Finding a suitable alternative on satisfactory terms may pose challenges in our industry competitive environment. As an alternative, we could expand our efforts to distribute and market our products directly. This alternative, however, would require substantial investment in additional sales, marketing and logistics resources, including hiring additional sales and customer service personnel, which would significantly increase our future selling, general and administrative expenses. In addition, buying patterns of these 2 distributors may fluctuate from quarter to quarter, potentially leading to uneven concentration levels on a quarterly basis. Seasonal Factors and Sporadic Outbreaks Our principal business is the sale of a broad range of diagnostic test kits for common gastrointestinal and respiratory infectious diseases, and elevated blood lead levels. Certain infectious diseases may be seasonal in nature, while others may be associated with sporadic outbreaks, such as foodborne illnesses or pandemics such as an influenza outbreak or the current COVID 19 pandemic. While we believe that the breadth of our diagnostic product lines normally reduces the risk that infections subject to seasonality and sporadic outbreaks will cause significant variability in diagnostic revenues, the current COVID 19 pandemic did result in a significant decline in our Diagnostics revenues during the second half of fiscal 2020. Accordingly, we can make no assurance that revenues will not be negatively impacted period over period by such factors. Changing Diagnostic Market Conditions Changes in the U.S. health care delivery system have resulted in consolidation among reference laboratories, hospital laboratories being operated by large reference laboratories, and the formation of multi hospital alliances, reducing the number of institutional customers for diagnostic test products. Consolidation in the U.S. health care industry has also led to the creation of group purchasing organizations ( GPOs ) and IDNs that aggregate buying power for hospital groups and put pressure on our selling prices. Due to such consolidation, we may not be able to enter into and or sustain contractual or other marketing or distribution arrangements on a satisfactory commercial basis with institutional customers, GPOs and or IDNs, which could adversely affect our results of operations. We could be adversely affected by health care reform legislation. Third party payers for medical products and services, including state, federal and foreign governments, are increasingly concerned about escalating health care costs and can indirectly affect the pricing or the relative attractiveness of our products by regulating the maximum amount of reimbursement they will provide for diagnostic testing services. Following years of increasing pressure, during 2010 the U.S. government enacted comprehensive health care reform with the enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, which made changes that significantly impact the pharmaceutical and medical device industries. The Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 requires applicable laboratories to report all private payor reimbursement rates and the volumes for each test they perform. The statute requires that Medicare establish reimbursement rates based on the weighted median of private insurance reimbursement rates effective January 1, 2017. The new Medicare rates would be subject to a maximum reduction of 10% a year for the initial 3 year period and a maximum of 15% a year for the subsequent 3 year period. There is no limit on the amount of potential rate increases. As a result, some of our customers in the United States may experience lower Medicare reimbursement rates for our products, which may adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. We are seeing some effect on the reimbursement rates for our products. If reimbursement amounts for diagnostic testing services decrease further in the future, such decreases may reduce the amount that will be reimbursed to hospitals or physicians for such services and consequently, could place constraints on the levels of overall pricing, which could have a material effect on our revenues and or results of operations. 13 Table of Contents Additional state and federal health care reform measures may be adopted in the future, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our ability to successfully commercialize our products and on our industry in general. For example, the United States government has in the past considered, is currently considering, and may in the future consider, health care policies and proposals intended to curb rising health care costs, including those that could significantly affect both private and public reimbursement for health care services. Further, state and local governments, as well as a number of foreign governments, are also considering or have adopted similar types of policies. Future significant changes in the health care system in the United States or elsewhere, and current uncertainty about whether and how changes may be implemented, could have a negative impact on the demand for our products. We are unable to predict whether health care policies, including policies stemming from legislation or regulations affecting our business, may be proposed or enacted in the future, what effect such policies would have on our business, or the effect that ongoing uncertainty about these matters will have on the purchasing decisions of our customers. Efforts to reduce the U.S. federal deficit could adversely affect our results of operations. As part of the Budget Control Act passed in August 2011 to extend the federal debt limit and reduce government spending, $12 trillion in automatic spending cuts (known as sequestration) were implemented in 2013 The sequestration requires a 2% cut in Medicare payments for all services, including our diagnostic tests, which, due to subsequent legislative amendments to the statute, will remain in effect through 2024 unless Congressional action is otherwise taken. Government research funding has also been reduced as a result of the sequestration. On January 2, 2013, the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 also was signed into law, which, among other things, further reduces Medicare payments to providers such as hospitals, imaging centers and cancer treatment centers, and increases the statute of limitations period for the government to recover overpayments to providers from 3 to five years. Such reductions in government health care spending or research funding could result in reduced demand for our products or additional pricing pressure. Further, there is ongoing uncertainty regarding the federal budget and federal spending levels, including the possible impacts of a failure to increase the debt ceiling. Any U.S. government default on its debt could have broad macroeconomic effects that could, among other things, raise our borrowing costs. Any future shutdown of the federal government or failure to enact annual appropriations could also have a material adverse impact on our business. Revenues for our Life Science segment may be impacted by customer concentrations and buying patterns. Our Life Science segment revenues from 3 diagnostic manufacturing customers were 27% and 26% of the Life Science segment total revenues for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively, with such percentage for fiscal 2019 being concentrated in 2 of the customers. Sales to these 3 diagnostic manufacturing customers comprised 14% and 8% of total consolidated revenues for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. In addition, in excess of 10% of the segment total revenues has historically been concentrated among a number of other significant customers. Any significant alteration of buying patterns from these customers could adversely affect our period over period revenues and results of operations. We expect to face increased competition resulting from expiration of our H. pylori patents. The patents for our stool antigen H. pylori products, owned by us, expired in May 2016 in the U.S. and in May 2017 in countries outside the U.S. We expect competition with respect to our stool antigen H. pylori products, high margin products which represent approximately 10% of our total revenues, to continue to increase, as we currently are 1 of only four companies that market FDA cleared tests to detect H. pylori antigen in stool samples in the U.S. market, 1 of which is DiaSorin Inc., with whom we have entered a strategic collaboration agreement to sell H. pylori tests. At present, we are also aware of at least 1 other company that has commenced clinical trials of H. pylori products in the U.S. Such competition may have an adverse impact on our selling prices for these products, or our ability to retain business at prices acceptable to us, and consequently, adversely affect our future results of operations and liquidity, including revenues and gross profit. We have executed on a number of measures to address competitive pressures in coming off patent including (i) in October 2018, we entered into a strategic collaboration with DiaSorin to sell H. pylori tests; (ii) we have executed multi year supply agreements with our 2 largest reference laboratory customers for H. pylori tests to secure volume, albeit at lower selling prices; and (iii) upon FDA clearance in March 2020, we launched Curian HpSA, our first assay on the new Curian platform, which we expect will help protect our existing customer base using lateral flow tests. We also expect the acquisition of the Exalenz BreathID platform to combat competitive pressures, as we believe that we are now the only company with FDA cleared, non invasive assays for both stool antigen and urea breath samples, allowing physicians a choice in test format from 1 supplier. We are unable to provide assurances that we will be successful with any strategy or that any strategy will prevent an adverse effect on our future results of operations and liquidity, including revenues and gross profit. 14 Table of Contents We depend on international revenues, and our financial results may be adversely impacted by foreign currency, regulatory or other developments affecting international markets. We sell products and services into approximately 70 countries. For fiscal 2020, approximately 1 third of our consolidated revenues were transacted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. We are subject to the risks associated with fluctuations in the exchange rates for the Australian dollar, British pound, Canadian dollar, Chinese yuan, Euro, and New Israeli shekel. We are also subject to other risks associated with international operations, including longer customer payment cycles, trade wars, increased tariffs, requirements for export licenses, instability of foreign governments, and governmental requirements with respect to the importation and distribution of medical devices and immunodiagnostic and molecular biology reagents, all of which may vary by country. New tariffs and other trade measures could adversely affect our financial results. The current U.S. administration has expressed strong concerns about imports from countries that it perceives as engaging in unfair trade practices, and it is possible the administration could impose import duties or other restrictions on products, comp1nts or raw materials sourced from those countries, which may include countries from which we import comp1nts or raw materials. We are currently not aware of any new import duties imposed on our products. Any such new import duties or restrictions could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. Moreover, these new tariffs, or other changes in U.S. trade policy, could trigger retaliatory actions by affected countries. Certain foreign governments have instituted or are considering imposing trade sanctions on certain U.S. goods. Other foreign governments are considering the imposition of sanctions that will deny U.S. companies access to critical raw materials. A trade war of this nature or other governmental actions related to tariffs or international trade agreements or policies has the potential to adversely impact demand for our products, our costs, customers, manufacturers, suppliers and or the economic environments in which we operate and, thus may adversely impact our businesses. In addition, there may be changes to existing trade agreements, like the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and its anticipated successor agreement, the U.S. Mexico Canada Agreement ( USMCA ), which is still subject to approval by the United States, Mexico and Canada, greater restrictions on free trade generally, and significant increases in tariffs on goods imported into the United States, particularly tariffs on products manufactured in Mexico, among other possible changes. It remains unclear what the U.S. administration or foreign governments will or will not do with respect to tariffs, NAFTA, USMCA or other international trade agreements and policies. Any changes to NAFTA (or subsequent trade agreements) could impact our operations in countries where we manufacture or sell products, or source comp1nts or materials, which could adversely affect our operating results and our business. Risks Affecting our Manufacturing Operations We are subject to comprehensive regulation, and our ability to earn profits may be restricted by these regulations. Medical device diagnostics is a highly regulated industry. We cannot provide assurance that we will be able to obtain necessary governmental clearances or approvals, or timely clearances or approvals, to market future products in the United States and other countries. Costs and difficulties in complying with laws and regulations administered by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency, the Centers for Disease Control, or other regulators can result in unanticipated expenses and delays, and interruptions to the sale of new and existing products. Regulatory approval can be a lengthy, expensive and uncertain process, making the timing and costs of approvals difficult to predict. Failure to comply with these regulations can result in delays in obtaining authorization to sell products, seizure or recall of products, suspension or revocation of authority to manufacture or sell products, and other civil or criminal sanctions. 15 Table of Contents If we or our third party vendors fail to comply with FDA regulations relating to the manufacturing of our products or any comp1nt part, we may be subject to fines, injunctions and penalties, and our ability to commercially distribute and sell our products may be negatively impacted. Our diagnostics manufacturing facilities, and the manufacturing facilities of any of our third party diagnostic comp1nt manufacturers or critical suppliers, are required to comply with the FDA Quality System Regulation ( QSR ), which sets forth minimum standards for the procedures, execution and documentation of the design, testing, production, control, quality assurance, labeling, packaging, sterilization, storage, and shipping of the products we sell, and related regulations, including Medical Device Reporting ( MDR ) regulations regarding reporting of certain malfunctions and adverse events potentially associated with our products. The FDA may evaluate our compliance with the QSR, MDR and other regulations, among other ways, through periodic announced or unannounced inspections which could disrupt our operations and interrupt our manufacturing. If in conducting an inspection of our manufacturing facilities, or the manufacturing facilities of any of our third party comp1nt manufacturers or critical suppliers, an FDA investigator observes conditions or practices believed to violate the QSR, the investigator may document their observations on a Form FDA 483 that is issued at the conclusion of the inspection. A manufacturer that receives an FDA 483 may respond in writing and explain any corrective actions taken in response to the inspectional observations. The FDA will typically review the facility written response and may re inspect to determine the facility compliance with the QSR and other applicable regulatory requirements. Failure to take adequate and timely corrective actions to remedy objectionable conditions listed on an FDA 483 could result in the FDA taking administrative or enforcement actions. Among these may be the FDA issuance of a Warning Letter to a manufacturer, which informs it that the FDA considers the observed violations to be of regulatory significance that, if not corrected, could result in further enforcement action. FDA enforcement actions, which include seizure, injunction, criminal prosecution, and civil penalties, could result in total or partial suspension of a facility production and or distribution, product recalls, fines, suspension of the FDA review of product applications, and or the FDA issuance of adverse publicity. Thus, an adverse inspection could force a shutdown of our manufacturing operations or a recall of our products. Adverse inspections could also delay FDA approval of our products and could have an adverse effect on our production, sales and profitability. We and any of our third party vendors may also encounter other problems during manufacturing including failure to follow specific protocols and procedures, equipment malfunction, and environmental factors, any of which could delay or impede our ability to meet demand. The manufacture of our product also subjects us to risks that could harm our business, including problems relating to our facilities and errors in manufacturing comp1nts that could negatively affect the efficacy or safety of our products or cause delays in shipment of our products. Any interruption or delay in the manufacture of the product, or any of its comp1nts could impair our ability to meet the demand of our customers and cause them to cancel orders or switch to competitive products, which could, therefore, have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. On June 29, 2017, the FDA, in connection with its Safety Notification related to Magellan (whom we acquired in March 2016) and its lead testing systems for venous blood samples, issued its Form 483, Inspectional Observations, to Magellan. This was followed by the FDA issuing a Warning Letter related to the matter on October 23, 2017. During October 2019, the FDA conducted a follow up inspection of Magellan manufacturing facility. In connection with this follow up inspection, the FDA issued five Form 483 observations. Over the last year, we have submitted a number of written responses to the FDA regarding the five Form 483 observations issued in the October 2019 inspection, and have worked diligently to execute a remediation plan. During October 2020, the FDA issued Establishment Inspection Reports which closed out the inspections from June 2017 and October 2019 under 21 C.F.R.20.64 (d) (3). The Warning Letter issued in October 2017 remains outstanding, pending a future FDA inspection. While we remain committed to strengthening Magellan quality system and ensuring that all aspects of the system are in full compliance, we can provide no assurance that our remediation efforts will be successful to a degree acceptable by the FDA. Additionally, as set forth in Item 3 Legal Proceedings , on April 17, 2018, Magellan received a subpoena from the United States Department of Justice ( DOJ ) regarding its LeadCare product line. The subpoena outlines documents to be produced, and we are cooperating with the DOJ in this matter. We maintain rigorous policies and procedures to promote compliance with applicable regulatory agencies and requirements, and are working with the DOJ to promptly respond to the subpoena, including responding to additional information requests. We have executed tolling agreements to extend the statute of limitations. We cannot predict when the investigation will be resolved, the outcome of the investigation, or its potential impact on Meridian. 16 Table of Contents See a more detailed discussion of these matters within MD&A on page 28. Significant interruptions in production at our principal manufacturing facilities and or third party manufacturing facilities would adversely affect our business and operating results. Products and services manufactured at facilities we own or lease comprised a majority of our revenues. Our global supply of these products and services is dependent on the uninterrupted and efficient operation of these facilities. In addition, we currently rely on a small number of third party manufacturers to produce certain of our diagnostic products and product comp1nts. The operations of our facilities or these third party manufacturing facilities could be adversely affected by power failures, or natural or other disasters such as earthquakes, floods, tornadoes or terrorist threats. Although we carry insurance to protect against certain business interruptions at our facilities, there can be no assurance that such coverage will be adequate or that such coverage will continue to remain available on acceptable terms, if at all. Any significant interruption in the Company or a third party supplier manufacturing capabilities could materially and adversely affect our operating results. We depend on sole source suppliers for certain critical raw materials, comp1nts and finished products. A supply interruption could adversely affect our business. Raw Materials and Comp1nts Our diagnostic products are made from a wide variety of raw materials that are biological or chemical in nature, and that generally are available from multiple sources of supply. We sole source certain raw materials and comp1nts, which makes it time consuming and costly to switch raw materials and comp1nts in FDA cleared products. If certain suppliers fail to supply required raw materials or comp1nts, we will need to secure other sources which may require us to conduct additional development and testing and obtain regulatory approval. These activities require significant time and resources, and there is no assurance that new sources will be secured or regulatory approvals, if necessary, will be obtained. We utilize third party manufacturers for certain of our instrumentation. 1 third party manufactures our proprietary Alethia Incubator Reader (instrument), a comp1nt of our Alethia molecular system, and an additional third party manufactures our Curian instrument. These instruments are manufactured exclusively for Meridian according to our specifications. While other manufacturers for these types of instruments are available, we source each instrument solely from 1 manufacturer to limit the costs involved in clearing the system for marketing in the United States. If these third party manufacturers fail to supply us with instruments, we will need to secure another manufacturer, and it may take as long as 12 months to transfer instrument manufacturing. An interruption in the manufacturing of these instruments could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. Additionally, 1 third party manufactures a certain reagent for use with our Alethia assays. While alternative suppliers exist, we elect to utilize this third party exclusively in order to maintain consistency in our materials, which is critical in complying with FDA regulatory requirements. An interruption in the manufacturing of these reagents could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. Finished Products We outsource the manufacturing for certain finished diagnostic products to third parties. A disruption in the supply of these finished products could have a material adverse effect on our business until we find another supplier or bring manufacturing in house. Four products manufactured exclusively for us by 2 separate and independent companies accounted for 7%, 11% and 11% of consolidated revenues in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Meridian owns all rights and title to the FDA 510(k) clearances for these products. Activities undertaken by Meridian to reduce the risk of these sole supplier arrangements include maintaining adequate inventory levels, supplier qualification procedures, supplier audits, site visits, and frequent communication. Additionally, we have identified potential alternate suppliers. 17 Table of Contents Our ability to meet future customer demand for selected products is dependent upon our ability to successfully manage our manufacturing capacity. To manage our anticipated future growth effectively, it may become necessary for us to enhance our manufacturing and supply chain capabilities, infrastructure and operations, information technology infrastructure, and financial and accounting systems and controls. Organizational growth and scale up of operations could strain our existing managerial, operational, financial, and other resources. If our management is unable to effectively prepare for our expected future growth, our expenses may increase more than anticipated, our revenue could grow more slowly than expected, and we may not be able to achieve our commercialization, profitability, or product development goals. Our failure to effectively implement the necessary processes and procedures and otherwise prepare for our anticipated growth could have a material adverse effect on our future financial results and condition. Risks Related to Intellectual Property and Product Liability We may be unable to protect or obtain proprietary rights that we utilize or intend to utilize. In developing and manufacturing our products, we employ a variety of proprietary and patented technologies. In addition, we have licensed, and expect to continue to license, various complementary technologies and methods from academic institutions and public and private companies. We cannot provide assurance that the technologies that we own or license provide protection from competitive threats or from challenges to our intellectual property. In addition, we cannot provide assurances that we will be successful in obtaining and retaining licenses, or proprietary or patented technologies, in the future. Product infringement claims by other companies could result in costly disputes and could limit our ability to sell our products. Litigation over intellectual property rights is prevalent in the diagnostic industry. As the market for diagnostics continues to grow and the number of participants in the market increases, we may increasingly be subject to patent infringement claims. It is possible that a third party may claim infringement against us. If found to infringe, we may attempt to obtain a license to such intellectual property; however, we may be unable to do so on favorable terms, or at all. Additionally, if our products are found to infringe on third party intellectual property, we may be required to pay damages for past infringement and lose the ability to sell certain products, causing our revenues to decrease. Any substantial loss resulting from such a claim could have a material adverse effect on our profitability, and the damage to our reputation in the industry could have a material adverse effect on our business. If product liability lawsuits are successfully brought against us, we may incur substantial liabilities and may have to limit or cease sales of our products. The testing, manufacturing and marketing of medical diagnostic products involves an inherent risk of product liability claims. If we cannot successfully defend ourselves against product liability claims, we may incur substantial liabilities or be required to limit or cease sales of our products. We currently carry product liability insurance at a level we believe is commercially reasonable, although there is no assurance that it will be adequate to cover claims that may arise. In certain customer contracts, we indemnify third parties for certain product liability claims related to our products. These indemnification obligations may cause us to pay significant sums of m1y for claims that are covered by these indemnifications. In addition, a defect in the design or manufacture of our products could have a material adverse effect on our reputation in the industry and subject us to claims of liability for injury and otherwise. Any substantial underinsured loss resulting from such a claim could have a material adverse effect on our profitability, and the damage to our reputation in the industry could have a material adverse effect on our business. 18 Table of Contents Risks Related to Our Common Stock The authority of our board to issue preferred stock and the effects of certain provisions of Ohio corporation law may discourage takeover bids. Our board of directors has the authority to issue up to 1,000 shares of undesignated preferred stock and to determine the rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions, including voting rights, of such shares without any future vote or action by the shareholders. The issuance of preferred stock under certain circumstances could have the effect of delaying or preventing a change in control of our company. Ohio corporation law contains provisions that may discourage takeover bids for our company that have not been negotiated with the board of directors. Such provisions could limit the price that investors might be willing to pay in the future for shares of our common stock. In addition, sales of substantial amounts of shares in the public market could adversely affect the market price of our common stock and our ability to raise additional capital at a price favorable to us. The market price of our common stock may be volatile and fluctuate significantly, which could result in substantial losses for stockholders and subject us to litigation. The market price of our common stock may be subject to significant fluctuations due to numerous factors, including but not limited to the risks described in this Risk Factors section. In addition, the stock market in general, the NASDAQ Global Market and the market for diagnostics companies in particular may experience a loss of investor confidence. A loss of investor confidence may result in extreme price and volume fluctuations in our common stock that are unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of our business, financial condition or results of operations. These broad market and industry factors may materially harm the market price of our common stock and expose us to securities class action litigation. Class action litigation, even if unsuccessful, could be costly to defend and divert management attention and resources, which could further materially harm our financial condition and results of operations. Our business could be negatively impacted as a result of shareholder activism, an unsolicited takeover proposal or a proxy contest. In recent years, proxy contests and other forms of stockholder activism have been directed against numerous public companies. If a proxy contest or an unsolicited takeover proposal is made with respect to us, we could incur significant costs in defending our company, which would have an adverse effect on our financial results. Shareholder activists may also seek to involve themselves in the governance, strategic direction and operations of our company. Such proposals may disrupt our business and divert the attention of our management and employees, and any perceived uncertainties as to our future direction resulting from such a situation could result in the loss of potential business opportunities, be exploited by our competitors, cause concern to our current or potential customers, and make it more difficult to attract and retain qualified personnel and business partners, all of which could adversely affect our business. In addition, actions of activist stockholders may cause significant fluctuations in our stock price based on temporary or speculative market perceptions or other factors that do not necessarily reflect the underlying fundamentals and prospects of our business. There can be no assurance that we will resume the payment of dividends. The declaration, amount and timing of the Company dividends are subject to capital availability and determinations by our board of directors that cash dividends are in the best interest of our stockholders and are in compliance with all respective laws, including the applicable provisions of Ohio law, and our agreements applicable to the declaration and payment of cash dividends. We suspended the payment of quarterly cash dividends effective during the fiscal 2019 second quarter. Any action to resume the payment of dividends will depend upon, among other factors, our cash balances and potential future capital requirements for strategic transactions, including acquisitions, debt service requirements, results of operations, financial condition and other factors beyond our control that our board of directors may deem relevant. Ongoing suspension of our dividend payments could have a negative effect on our stock price. General Risk Factors Intense competition could adversely affect our profitability. The markets for our products and services are characterized by substantial competition and rapid change. Hundreds of companies around the world supply diagnostic tests and immunoassay and molecular reagents. These companies range from multinational health care entities, for which diagnostics is 1 line of business, to small start up companies. Many of our competitors have significantly greater financial, technical, manufacturing and marketing resources than we do. We cannot provide assurance that our products and services will be able to compete successfully with the products and services of our competitors. 19 Table of Contents We incur costs and demands upon management as a result of complying with the laws and regulations affecting public companies in the United States, and failure to comply with these laws could harm our business and the price of our common stock. As a public company listed in the United States, we incur significant legal, accounting and other expenses. In addition, changing laws, regulations and standards relating to corporate governance and public disclosure, including regulations implemented by the SEC, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board ( PCAOB ) and the NASDAQ Global Select Market, may increase our legal and financial compliance costs and or make some activities more time consuming. These laws, regulations and standards are subject to varying interpretations and, as a result, their application in practice may evolve over time as new guidance is provided by regulatory and governing bodies. We intend to invest resources to comply with evolving laws, regulations and standards, and this investment may result in increased general and administrative expenses and a diversion of management time and attention from revenue generating activities to compliance activities. If we fail to comply with new laws, regulations and standards, regulatory authorities may initiate legal proceedings against us, and our business may be harmed. Our business could be negatively affected if we are unable to attract, hire and retain key personnel. Our future success depends on our continued ability to attract, hire and retain highly qualified personnel, including our executive officers and scientific, technical, sales and marketing employees, and their ability to manage growth successfully. If such key employees were to leave and we were unable to obtain adequate replacements, our operating results could be adversely affected. Our bank credit agreement imposes restrictions with respect to our operations. Our bank credit agreement contains a number of financial covenants that require us to meet certain financial ratios and tests. If we fail to comply with the obligations in the credit agreement, we would be in default under the credit agreement. If an event of default is not cured or waived, it could result in acceleration of any indebtedness under our credit agreement, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. At September 30, 2020, we had $68,824 outstanding on a $160,000 bank revolving credit facility. Changes in the method of determining London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ), or the replacement of LIBOR with an alternative reference rate, may adversely affect interest expense related to outstanding debt. Amounts drawn under our credit facility may bear interest rates in relation to LIBOR, depending on our selection of repayment options. On July 27, 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) in the U.K. announced that it would phase out LIBOR as a benchmark by the end of 2021 It is unclear whether new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established such that it continues to exist after 2021 The U.S. Federal Reserve is considering replacing U.S. dollar LIBOR with a newly created index called the Broad Treasury Financing Rate, calculated with a broad set of short term repurchase agreements backed by treasury securities. If LIBOR ceases to exist, we may need to renegotiate the credit facility and may not be able to do so with terms that are favorable to us. The overall financial market may be disrupted as a result of the phase out or replacement of LIBOR. Disruption in the financial market or the inability to renegotiate the credit facility with favorable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, and operating results. We face risks related to global economic conditions. We currently generate significant operating cash flows, which combined with access to the credit markets, provides us with discretionary funding capacity for research and development and other strategic activities. However, as an enterprise with global operations and markets, our operations and financial performance are in part dependent upon global economic conditions, and we could be negatively impacted by a global, regional or national economic crisis, including sovereign risk in the event of deterioration in the credit worthiness of or a default by local governments. We are particularly susceptible to the economic conditions in countries where government sponsored health care systems are the primary payers for health care, including those countries within the European Union that are reducing their public expenditures in an effort to achieve cost savings. The uncertainty in global economic conditions poses a risk to the overall economy that could impact demand for our products, as well as our ability to manage normal commercial relationships with our customers, suppliers and creditors, including financial institutions. As such, if global economic conditions deteriorate significantly, our business could be negatively impacted, including such areas as reduced demand for our products from a slow down in the general economy, supplier or customer disruptions resulting from tighter credit markets, and or temporary interruptions in our ability to conduct day to day transactions through our financial intermediaries involving the payment to or collection of funds from our customers, vendors and suppliers. While to date such factors have not had a significant negative impact on our results or operations, we continue to monitor and plan for the potential impact of these global economic factors. 20 Table of Contents In June 2016, a majority of voters in the United Kingdom elected to withdraw from the European Union in a national referendum. The U.K. is currently in a transition period relating to its exit from the European Union ( Brexit ). In January 2020, the U.K. and the European Union ratified a Withdrawal Agreement that set out the transition period of eleven months, from February 1, 2020 until December 31, 2020, during which the final terms of the U.K. departure would be negotiated. Although the Withdrawal Agreement ensures that a no deal or cliff edge Brexit was avoided on January 31, 2020, there is no certainty that a similar effect will be avoided at the end of 2020. The ongoing uncertainty on the final terms of the withdrawal could lead to economic stagnation until an ultimate resolution with respect to Brexit occurs. If the U.K. and the European Union are unable to negotiate acceptable agreements during the transition period or if other European Union Member States pursue withdrawal, it will likely have an adverse impact on labor and trade in addition to creating further short term uncertainty and currency volatility. In the absence of future trade deals, the U.K. trade with the European Union and the rest of the world may be subject to tariffs and duties set by the World Trade Organization. Additionally, the movement of goods and personnel between the U.K. and the remaining member states of the European Union will be subject to additional inspections and documentation checks, leading to possible delays at ports of entry and departure. Even if final terms of the U.K. withdrawal from the European Union are approved, the withdrawal could result in significant changes to the trading relationship between the U.K. and the European Union. These changes to the trading relationship between the U.K and the European Union would likely result in increased cost of goods imported into and exported from the U.K. and may decrease the profitability of our operations. Additional currency volatility could drive a weaker British pound, which could increase the cost of goods imported into the U.K. and may decrease the profitability of our operations. A weaker British pound versus the U.S. dollar may also cause local currency results of our operations to be translated into fewer U.S. dollars during a reporting period. With a range of outcomes still possible, the impact from Brexit remains uncertain and will depend, in part, on the final outcome of tariff, trade, regulatory and other negotiations. 1 or more cybersecurity incidents may adversely impact our financial condition, results of operations and reputation. Our operations involve the use of multiple systems that process, store and transmit sensitive information about our customers, suppliers, employees, financial position, operating results and strategies. We face global cybersecurity risks and threats on a continual and ongoing basis, which include, but are not limited to, attempts to access systems and information, computer viruses, or denial of service attacks. These risks and threats range from uncoordinated individual attempts to sophisticated and targeted measures. While we are not aware of any material cyber attacks or breaches of our systems to date, we have and continue to implement measures to safeguard our systems and information and mitigate potential risks, including employee training around phishing, malware and other cyber risks, but there is no assurance that such actions will be sufficient to prevent cyber attacks or security breaches that manipulate or improperly use our systems, compromise sensitive information, destroy or corrupt data, or otherwise disrupt our operations. The occurrence of such events, including breaches of our security measures or those of our third party service providers, could negatively impact our reputation and our competitive position and could result in litigation with third parties, regulatory action, loss of business due to disruption of operations and or reputational damage, potential liability and increased remediation and protection costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. In an effort to mitigate the financial impact such an attack might have on the Company, we maintain cyber liability insurance coverage. However, such coverage may be insufficient to cover the full impact of a cyber attack. Additionally, as cybersecurity risks become more sophisticated, we may need to increase our investments in security measures which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Natural disasters, war and other events could adversely affect our future revenues and operating income. Natural disasters (including pandemics), war, terrorism, labor disruptions and international conflicts, and actions taken by the United States and other governments or by our customers or suppliers in response to such events, could cause significant economic disruption and political and social instability in the United States and in areas outside of the United States in which we operate. These events could result in decreased demand for our products, adversely affect our manufacturing and distribution capabilities, or increase the costs for, or cause interruptions in, the supply of materials from our suppliers. 21 Table of Contents ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES 
