CIK: 924717
Company Name: SURMODICS INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2018-11-30
Accession Number: 0001564590-18-030336


ITEM 1 BUSINESS. 3 our expectations related to expenses and regulatory approvals. You should carefully consider forward looking statements and understand that such statements involve a variety of risks and uncertainties, known and unknown, and may be affected by inaccurate assumptions. Consequently, no forward looking statement can be guaranteed and actual results may vary materially. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statement. Investors are advised not to place undue reliance upon the Company forward looking statements and to consult any further disclosures by the Company on such topics in this and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). Factors that could cause our actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward looking statements include, but are not limited to, those described in Item 1A Risk Factors below. the Company whole products solutions strategy, and sales efforts, the impact of significant customer agreements, including its agreements with Medtronic plc ( Medtronic ) and Abbott Vascular, Inc. ( Abbott ), the impact of acquisitions, including related license fee revenue and the estimated cost associated with the TRANSCEND clinical trial and other clinical trials, DCB ), SurVeil drug coated balloon ( Certain statements contained in this Form 10 K, or in other reports of the Company and other written and oral statements made from time to time by the Company, do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. As such, they are considered forward looking statements that provide current expectations or forecasts of future events. These forward looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements can be identified by the use of terminology such as anticipate, believe, could, estimate, expect, forecast, intend, may, plan, possible, project, will and similar words or expressions. Any statement that is not a historical fact, including estimates, projections, future trends and the outcome of events that have not yet occurred, is a forward looking statement. The Company forward looking statements generally relate to its growth and transformation strategy, including our whole product solutions strategy and our ability to develop and commercialize medical device products, financial prospects, product development programs including development and commercialization of the SurVeil ng Statements Forward Looki 48 Signatures 44 Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule Item 15. V 43 Principal Accountant Fees and Services Item 14. 43 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 43 Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item 12 43 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 43 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 42 Other Information Item 9B. 41 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 41 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 41 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 41 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Item 7A. 29 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 29 Selected Financial Data Item 6. 27 Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5. I 26 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 26 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 26 Item 2 Properties
