CIK: 105770
Company Name: WEST PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICES INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2016-02-26
Accession Number: 0000105770-16-000060


ITEM 1 BUSINESS General West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc. (which may be referred to as West , the Company , we , us or our ) is a manufacturer of comp1nts and systems for the packaging and delivery of injectable drugs as well as comp1nts for the pharmaceutical, healthcare and consumer products industries. Our products include stoppers and seals for vials, prefillable syringe comp1nts and systems, comp1nts for intravenous and blood collection systems, safety and administration systems, advanced injection systems, and contract design and manufacturing services. Our customers include the leading global producers of pharmaceuticals, biologics, medical devices and consumer products. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on July 27, 1923 All trademarks and registered trademarks used in this report are the property of West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc., either directly or indirectly through its subsidiaries unless noted otherwise. Daikyo Crystal Zenith ( CZ ) is a registered trademark of Daikyo Seiko, Ltd. ("Daikyo"). Throughout this report, references to Notes refer to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in I, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K ("Form 10 K"), unless otherwise indicated. West Website We maintain a website at www.westpharma.com . Our Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available on our website under the Investors SEC Filings caption as soon as reasonably practical after we electronically file the material with, or furnish it to, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). These filings are also available to the public over the Internet at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov . You may also read and copy any document we file at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F. Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room. Throughout this Form 10 K, we incorporate by reference certain information from parts of other documents filed with the SEC and from our Proxy Statement for the 2016 Annual Meeting of Shareholders ( 2016 Proxy Statement ), which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days following the end of our 2015 fiscal year. Our 2016 Proxy Statement will be available on our website on or about March 31, 2016, under the caption Investors Annual Report & Proxy . Information about our corporate governance, including our Corporate Governance Principles and Code of Business Conduct, as well as information about our Directors, Board Committees, Committee Charters, and instructions on how to contact the Board is available on our website under the Investors Corporate Governance caption. We intend to make any required disclosures regarding any amendments of our Code of Business Conduct or waivers granted to any of our directors or executive officers under the heading Code of Business Conduct on our website. Information relating to the West Pharmaceutical Services Dividend Reinvestment Plan is also available on our website under the Investors Transfer Agent Dividend Reinvestment caption. We will provide any of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to our Corporate Secretary, West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc., 530 Herman O. West Drive, Exton, PA 19341 3 Business Segments In 2015, our business operations consisted of 2 reportable segments, the Pharmaceutical Packaging Systems segment ("Packaging Systems") and the Pharmaceutical Delivery Systems segment ( Delivery Systems ). Beginning in 2016, we are changing our organization and reporting structure for our next phase of growth and development, which will result in a change to Proprietary Products and Contract Manufactured Products as reportable segments. The Proprietary Products reportable segment, which will combine the existing Packaging Systems segment with the proprietary products portion of the existing Delivery Systems segment, will develop commercial, operational, and innovation strategies across our global ne2rk, with specific emphasis on product offerings to biologic, generic, and pharmaceutical customers. The Contract Manufactured Products reportable segment, which will consist of the contract manufacturing portion of the existing Delivery Systems segment, will serve as a fully integrated business focused on the design, manufacture, and automated assembly of complex assemblies for pharmaceutical and medical device customers. The information and discussion included in this Form 10 K reflects the structure in place as of December 31, 2015. Packaging Systems Segment Our Packaging Systems segment includes primary packaging comp1nts and systems for injectable drug delivery, including stoppers and seals for vials, closures and other comp1nts used in syringe, intravenous and blood collection systems, and prefillable syringe comp1nts. The growth strategy for Packaging Systems includes organic growth through market segmentation, new product innovation, strategic acquisitions and geographic expansion. We have manufacturing facilities in North and South America, Europe and Asia Pacific, with affiliated companies in Mexico and Japan. See Item 2, Properties , for additional information on our manufacturing and other sites. Packaging Systems consists of 3 operating segments Americas, Europe and Asia Pacific which are aggregated for reporting purposes. Packaging Systems' products generally consist of elastomeric comp1nts offered in a variety of standard and customer specific configurations and formulations, which are available with advanced barrier films and coatings to enhance their performance. West FluroTec barrier film is applied to reduce the risk of product loss by contamination and protect the shelf life of packaged drugs. We also apply a fluoropolymer laminate to the surface of stoppers and plungers to improve compatibility between the closure and the drug. B2 coating is a coating applied to the surface of stoppers and plungers which eliminates the need for conventional silic1 application. It helps manufacturers reduce product rejections due to trace levels of silic1 molecules found in non coated packaged drug compounds. FluroTec and B2 coating technologies are licensed from Daikyo. In addition, our Westar RS and Westar RU post manufacturing processes are documented and fully validated procedures for washing, siliconizing and sterilizing stoppers and syringe comp1nts. The Westar RS process prepares comp1nts for introduction into the customer's sterilizer and the Westar RU process provides sterilized comp1nts. These processes increase the overall efficiency of injectable drug production by outsourcing comp1nt processing, thereby eliminating steps otherwise required in our customers' manufacturing processes, and help to assure compliance with the latest regulatory requirements for comp1nt preparation. We also offer Envision comp1nts that are inspected using automated vision inspection systems, ensuring that comp1nts (plungers and stoppers) meet enhanced quality specifications for visible and subvisible particulate contamination. In 2015, we launched Daikyo RUV comp1nts, which are manufactured using clean, high quality elastomer formulations and then washed, camera inspected and sterilized to help reduce the customer manufacturing footprint, streamline processes, minimize risks around comp1nt preparation and eliminate bioburden. Our NovaPure comp1nts, which include serum and lyophilization stoppers and syringe plungers, incorporate quality by design principles and are manufactured utilizing advanced process technologies. The closures provide the highest levels of quality to the market, helping to ensure the safety, efficacy and purity of injectable drug products. 4 Our tamper evident Flip Off seals are sold in a wide range of sizes and colors to meet customers' needs for product identification and differentiation. The seals can be provided using proprietary printing for cautionary statements and embossing technology that can serve as a counterfeiting deterrence. Our newest sterile drug vial seal, the Flip Off Plus RU seal, provides drug manufacturers around the world with ready to use, high quality seals that consistently achieve reproducible and safe container integrity for drug products while minimizing levels of bioburden and particulates. As an adjunct to our Packaging Systems products, we offer contract analytical laboratory services for testing and evaluating primary drug packaging comp1nts and their compatibility with the contained drug formulation. West Analytical Services provides customers with in depth knowledge and analysis of the interaction and compatibility of drug products with elastomer, glass and plastic packaging comp1nts. Our analytical laboratories also provide specialized testing for complete drug delivery systems. See Note 17, Segment Information, for net sales and asset information for Packaging Systems. Delivery Systems Segment Our Delivery Systems segment includes safety and administration systems, multi comp1nt systems for drug containment and administration and a variety of custom contract manufacturing solutions targeted to the healthcare and consumer products industries. Delivery Systems has expertise in product design and development, including in house mold design and construction, an engineering center for developmental and prototype tooling, process design and validation and high speed automated assemblies. In addition, Delivery Systems is responsible for the continued development and commercialization of our line of proprietary healthcare, administrative and advanced injection systems, including Daikyo CZ , SmartDose and other systems. Delivery Systems has manufacturing operations in North America and Europe. See Item 2, Properties , for additional information on our manufacturing and other sites. Delivery Systems includes a variety of products and services, which are described below The Daikyo CZ 1ml long Insert Needle syringe system is the market's first polymer syringe system without silic1 oil lubrication applied to the barrel or plunger that incorporates an insert molded needle to avoid the need for adhesive. The luer lock version of the Daikyo CZ syringe system was introduced previously, along with several sizes of sterile vials. Additional sizes of vials continue to be introduced. CZ technology is licensed from Daikyo. The development of our SmartDose electronic wearable injector continues to gain momentum in the marketplace, with multiple active development programs in place. This system is designed for controlled, subcutaneous delivery of high volume and high viscosity drugs, using prefillable Daikyo CZ cartridges. The system is fully programmable, has a single push button operation and a hidden needle for safety. The ConfiDose auto injector and SelfDose TM self injection systems enhance patient compliance and safety. The needle remains automatically shielded at all times. These systems eliminate preparation steps and simplify the injection of drugs, providing patients with a sterile, single use disposable system that can be readily used at home. Our administration systems include sterile devices for the preparation and administration of drug products, including patented products such as the MixJect transfer device, the Mix2Vial needleless reconstitution system, the Vial2Bag system, and a variety of vial adapters. Examples of our safety systems that are designed to prevent needle sticks are ris and NovaGuard SA for prefilled syringes and NovaGuard LP for luer lock syringes. 5 We offer customer contract manufacturing and assembly solutions, which use such technologies as multi comp1nt molding, in mold labeling, ultrasonic welding and clean room molding and device assembly used to manufacture customer owned comp1nts and devices used in surgical, diagnostic, ophthalmic, other drug delivery systems, and consumer products. See Note 17, Segment Information, for net sales and asset information for Delivery Systems. International We have significant operations outside of the United States ("U.S."), which are managed through the same business segments as our U.S. operations Packaging Systems and Delivery Systems. Sales outside of the U.S. accounted for 520% of consolidated net sales in 2015 . For a geographic breakdown of sales, see Note 17, Segment Information . Although the general business processes are similar to the domestic business, international operations are exposed to additional risks. These risks include currency fluctuations relative to the U.S. Dollar ("USD"), multiple tax jurisdictions and, particularly in South America and Israel, political and social issues that could destabilize local markets and affect the demand for our products. See further discussion of our international operations, the risks associated with our international operations, and our attempt to minimize some of these risks in , Item 1A, Risk Factors; I, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under the caption Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources; I, Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk; Note 1 under the captions Financial Instruments and Foreign Currency Translation; and Note 9, Derivative Financial Instruments . Raw Materials We use 3 basic raw materials in the manufacture of our products elastomers, aluminum and plastic. Elastomers include both natural and synthetic materials. We currently have access to adequate supplies of these raw materials to meet our production needs through agreements with suppliers. We employ a supply chain management strategy in our business segments, which involves purchasing from integrated suppliers that control their own sources of supply. Due to regulatory control over our production processes, and the cost and time involved in qualifying suppliers, we rely on single source suppliers for many critical raw materials. We purchase certain of our raw materials in the open market. This strategy increases the risk that our supply chain may be interrupted in the event of a supplier production problem. These risks are managed, where possible, by selecting suppliers with multiple manufacturing sites, rigorous quality control systems, surplus inventory levels and other methods of maintaining supply in case of an interruption in production. Intellectual Property Intellectual property, including patents, trade secrets and know how, is important to our business. We own or license intellectual property rights, including issued patents and pending patent applications in the U.S. and in other countries that relate to various aspects of our products. In particular, key value added and proprietary products and processes are licensed from Daikyo. Our intellectual property rights have been useful in establishing our market share and in the growth of our business, and are expected to continue to be of value in the future. Seasonality Although our Packaging Systems business is not inherently seasonal, sales and operating profit in the second half of the year are typically lower than the first half primarily due to scheduled plant shutdowns in conjunction with our customers' production schedules and the year end impact of holidays on production. Our Delivery Systems business is not inherently seasonal. 6 Working Capital We are required to carry significant amounts of inventory to meet customer requirements. In addition, some of our supply agreements require us to purchase inventory in bulk orders, which increases inventory levels but decreases the risk of supply interruption. Levels of inventory are also influenced by the seasonal patterns addressed above. For a more detailed discussion of working capital, please see the discussion in I, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under the caption Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resource s. Marketing Our Packaging Systems customers include most of the major branded pharmaceutical, generic and biopharmaceutical companies in the world. Packaging Systems comp1nts and other products are sold to major pharmaceutical, biotechnology and hospital supply medical device companies, which incorporate them into their products for distribution to the ultimate end user. Our Delivery Systems segment sells to many of the world's largest pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical and medical device companies and to large customers within the consumer and food and beverage industries. Delivery Systems comp1nts generally are incorporated into our customers' manufacturing lines for further processing or assembly. Our products and services are distributed primarily through our own sales force and distribution ne2rk, with limited use of contract sales agents and regional distributors. Our ten largest customers accounted for 420% of our consolidated net sales in 2015 , but n1 of these customers individually accounted for more than 10% of net sales. See Note 17, Segment Information , for information on sales by significant product group. Order Backlog Order backlog includes firm orders placed by customers for manufacture over a period of time according to their schedule or upon confirmation by the customer. We also have contractual arrangements with a number of our customers. Products covered by these contracts are included in our backlog only as orders are received. Order backlog may be positively or negatively impacted by several factors, including customer ordering patterns and the necessary lead time to deliver customer orders. Order backlog is 1 of many measures we use to understand future demand, and should not be considered in isolation to predict future sales growth. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the order backlog for Packaging Systems was $4132 million and $339.7 million, respectively. The increase in backlog primarily reflects changes in customer ordering patterns and extended lead times for certain high value products, partially offset by an unfavorable foreign currency impact. In 2015, we had orders being placed further in advance by certain customers, some as much as a year, while others focused more on short term stock building. The entire order backlog for Packaging Systems at December 31, 2015 is expected to be filled during 2016. The majority of Delivery Systems' manufacturing activity is governed by contractual volume expectations, with terms between 1 and 3 years, subject to periodic revisions based on customer requirements. Competition We compete with several companies across our Packaging Systems product lines. Because of the special nature of our pharmaceutical packaging comp1nts and our long standing participation in the market, competition is based primarily on product design and performance, although total cost is becoming increasingly important as pharmaceutical companies continue with aggressive cost control programs across their operations. We differentiate ourselves from our competition as an integrated drug packaging and delivery systems global supplier that can provide pre sale primary packaging support and engineering development, analytical services, 7 regulatory expertise and after sale technical support. Customers also appreciate the global scope of West's manufacturing capability and our ability to produce many products at multiple sites. Our Delivery Systems business operates in very competitive markets for both healthcare and consumer products. The competition varies from smaller regional companies to large global molders. Given the extreme cost pressures they face, many of our customers look off shore to reduce cost. We differentiate ourselves by leveraging our global capability and by employing new technologies such as high speed automated assembly, insert molding, multi shot molding and expertise with multiple piece closure systems. There are a small number of competitors supplying medical devices and medical devices comp1nts. We compete for this market on the basis of our reputation for quality and reliability in engineering and project management, diverse contract manufacturing capabilities and knowledge of and experience in complying with U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") requirements. We also have specialized knowledge of container and closure comp1nts, which is integral to developing delivery systems. With our range of proprietary technologies, we compete with new and established companies in the area of drug delivery devices, including suppliers of prefillable syringes, auto injectors, safety needles and other proprietary systems. Research and Development Activities We maintain our own research scale production facilities and laboratories for developing new products, and offer contract engineering design and development services to assist customers with new product development. Our quality control, regulatory and laboratory testing capabilities are used to ensure compliance with applicable manufacturing and regulatory standards for primary and secondary pharmaceutical packaging comp1nts. The engineering departments are responsible for product and tooling design and testing, and for the design and construction of processing equipment. We continue to seek new innovative opportunities for acquisition, licensing, partnering or development of products, services and technologies that serve the injectable drug containment and delivery market. Research and development spending will continue to increase as we pursue innovative strategic platforms in prefillable syringes, injectable containers, advanced injection and safety and administration systems. Commercial development of our new products and services for medical and pharmaceutical applications commonly requires several years. New products that we develop may require separate approval as medical devices, and products that are intended to be used in the packaging and delivery of pharmaceutical products will be subject to both customer acceptance of our products and regulatory approval of the customer's products following our development period. We spent $14.4 million in 2015 , $16.3 million in 2014 , and $15.1 million in 2013 on research and development for Packaging Systems. Delivery Systems incurred research and development costs of $19.7 million , $210 million , and $228 million in the years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Environmental Regulations We are subject to various federal, state and local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to the protection of the environment. Our compliance with these laws and regulations has not had a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. There were no material capital expenditures for environmental control facilities in 2015 and there are no material expenditures planned for such purposes in 2016. Employees As of December 31, 2015 , we employed approximately 7,100 people in our operations throughout the world. 8 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS The statements in this section describe major risks to our business and should be considered carefully. In addition, these statements constitute our cautionary statements under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Our disclosure and analysis in this Form 10 K contains some forward looking statements that are based on management's beliefs and assumptions, current expectations, estimates and forecasts. We also provide forward looking statements in other materials we release to the public as well as oral forward looking statements. Such statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events. They do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. We have attempted, wherever possible, to identify forward looking statements by using words such as estimate, expect, intend, believe, plan, anticipate and other words and terms of similar meaning. In particular, these include statements relating to future actions, business plans and prospects, new products, future performance or results of current or anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, economic effects, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results. Many of the factors that will determine our future results are beyond our ability to control or predict. Achievement of future results is subject to known or unknown risks or uncertainties, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from past results and those expressed or implied in any forward looking statement. You should bear this in mind as you consider forward looking statements. Unless required by applicable securities law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. We also refer you to further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q and Current Reports on Form 8 K to the SEC. Our operating results may be adversely affected by unfavorable economic and market conditions. The current uncertainty in the global economy, including the continuing effects of recession or slow economic growth in the U.S., Europe, and emerging markets in Asia and South America, may negatively affect our operating results. Examples of the effects of these continuing global economic challenges include our suppliers' and our customers' inability to access the credit markets at commercially reasonable rates; reduction in sales due to customers decreasing their inventories in the near term or long term or due to liquidity difficulties; reduction in sales due to shortages of materials we purchase from our suppliers; reduction in research and development efforts and expenditures by our customers; our inability to hedge our currency and raw material risks sufficiently or at commercially reasonable prices; insolvency of suppliers or customers; inflationary pressures on our supplies or our products; and increased expenses due to growing taxation of corporate profits or revenues. Our operating results in 1 or more geographic regions may also be affected by uncertain or changing economic conditions within that region. If economic and market conditions in the U.S., Europe, or in emerging markets, weaken further, we may experience material adverse impacts on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our sales and profitability are largely dependent on the sale of drug products delivered by injection and the packaging of drug products. If the products developed by our customers in the future use another delivery system, our sales and profitability could suffer. Our business depends to a substantial extent on customers' continued sales and development of products that are delivered by injection. If our customers fail to continue to sell, develop and deploy injectable products or we are unable to develop new products that assist in the delivery of drugs by alternative methods, our sales and profitability may suffer. 9 Changes in foreign currency exchange rates could have a material adverse effect on our business and or results of operations. Our business is subject to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Sales outside of the U.S. accounted for 520% of our consolidated net sales in 2015 and we anticipate that sales from international operations will continue to represent a significant portion of our total sales in the future. In addition, many of our manufacturing facilities and suppliers are located outside of the U.S. Further, we intend to continue our expansion into emerging and or faster growing markets outside of the U.S. in the future. Virtually all of our international sales, assets and related operating costs and expenses are earned, valued or incurred in the currency of the local country, primarily the Euro, the Singapore Dollar, and the Danish Kr1 In addition, we are exposed to Japanese Yen ("Yen"), as we maintain a 25% ownership interest in, and we purchase finished goods and other materials from, Daikyo. We are also exposed to currencies in emerging market countries, such as the Chinese Yuan, the Indian Rupee, and various South American currencies, including the Venezuelan Bolivar and the Brazilian Real. Our consolidated financial statements are presented in USD, and, therefore, we must translate the reported values of our foreign assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses into USD, which can result in significant fluctuations in the amount of those assets, liabilities, revenues or expenses. The exchange rates between these foreign currencies and USD in recent years have fluctuated significantly and may continue to do so in the future. Increases or decreases in the value of USD compared to these foreign currencies may negatively affect the value of these Item 1n our consolidated financial statements, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results. In addition to translation risks, we incur currency transaction risk when we or 1 of our subsidiaries enters into a purchase or sales transaction in a currency other than that entity's local currency. In order to reduce our exposure to fluctuations in certain exchange rates, we have entered, and expect to continue to enter, into hedging arrangements, including the use of financial derivatives. There can be no certainty that we will be able to enter into or maintain hedges of these currency risks, or that our hedges will be effective, which could have a significant effect on our financial condition and operating results. If we are unable to provide comparative value advantages, timely fulfillment of customer orders or resist pricing pressure, we will have to reduce our prices, which may reduce our profit margins. We compete with several companies across our major product lines. Because of the special nature of these products, competition is based primarily on product design and performance, although total cost is becoming increasingly important as pharmaceutical companies continue with aggressive cost control programs across their operations. Competitors often compete on the basis of price. We differentiate ourselves from our competition as a "full service, value added" global supplier that is able to provide pre sale compatibility studies and other services and sophisticated post sale technical support on a global basis. However, we face continued pricing pressure from our customers and competitors. If we are unable to resist or to offset the effects of continued pricing pressure through our value added services, improved operating efficiencies and reduced expenditures, or if we have to reduce our prices, our sales and profitability may suffer. Consolidation in the pharmaceutical and healthcare industries could adversely affect our future revenues and operating income. The pharmaceutical and medical technology industries have experienced a significant amount of consolidation. As a result of this consolidation, competition to provide goods and services to customers has increased. In addition, group purchasing organizations and integrated health delivery ne2rks have served to concentrate purchasing decisions for some customers, which has placed pricing pressure on suppliers. Further consolidation within the industries we serve could exert additional pressure on the prices of our products. 10 We are subject to regulation by governments around the world, and if these regulations are not complied with, existing and future operations may be curtailed, and we could be subject to liability. The design, development, manufacturing, marketing and labeling of certain of our products and our customers' products that incorporate our products are subject to regulation by governmental authorities in the U.S., Europe and other countries, including the FDA and the European Medicines Agency. Complying with governmental regulation can be costly and can result in required modification or withdrawal of existing products and a substantial delay in the introduction of new products. Failure to comply with applicable regulatory requirements or failure to obtain regulatory approval for a new product could result in expenses and actions that could adversely affect our business and financial performance. Products incorporating our technologies are subject to regulations and extensive approval or clearance processes, which make the timing and success of new product commercialization difficult to predict. The process of obtaining FDA and other required regulatory approvals is expensive and time consuming. Historically, most medical devices incorporating our technologies have been subject to the FDA's 510(k) marketing approval process, which typically lasts from six to nine months. Supplemental or full pre market approval reviews require a significantly longer period, delaying commercialization. Pharmaceutical products incorporating our technologies are subject to the FDA's New Drug Application process, which typically takes a number of years to complete. Additionally, biotechnology products incorporating our technologies are subject to the FDA's Biologics License Application process, which also typically takes a number of years to complete. Outside of the U.S., sales of medical devices and pharmaceutical or biotechnology products are subject to international regulatory requirements that vary from country to country. The time required to obtain approval for sale internationally may be longer or shorter than that required for FDA approval. Changes in the regulation of drug products and devices may increase competitive pressure and adversely affect our business. An effect of the governmental regulation of our customers' drug products, devices, and manufacturing processes is that compliance with regulations makes it costly and time consuming for customers to substitute or replace comp1nts and devices produced by 1 supplier with those from another. The regulation of our customers' products that incorporate our comp1nts and devices has increased over time. If the applicable regulations were to be modified in a way that reduced the cost and time involved for customers to substitute 1 supplier's comp1nts or devices for those made by another, it is likely that the competitive pressure would increase and adversely affect our sales and profitability. If we are not successful in protecting our intellectual property rights, we may harm our ability to compete. Our patents, trademarks and other intellectual property are important to our business. We rely on patent, trademark, copyright, trade secret, and other intellectual property laws, as well as nondisclosure and confidentiality agreements and other methods, to protect our proprietary information, technologies and processes. We also have obligations with respect to the non use and non disclosure of third party intellectual property. We may need to engage in litigation or similar activities to enforce our intellectual property rights, to protect our trade secrets or to determine the validity and scope of proprietary rights of others. Any such litigation could require us to expend significant resources and divert the efforts and attention of our management and other personnel from our business operations. We cannot assure you that the steps we will take to prevent misappropriation, infringement or other violation of our intellectual property or the intellectual property of others will be successful. In addition, effective patent, copyright, trademark and trade secret protection may be unavailable or limited for some of our intellectual property in some countries. Failure to protect our intellectual property could harm our business and results of operations. In addition, if relevant and effective patent protection is not available or has expired, we may not prevent competitors from independently developing products and services similar or duplicative to ours. 11 Disruption in our manufacturing facilities could have a material adverse effect on our ability to make and sell products and have a negative impact on our reputation, performance or financial condition. We have manufacturing sites throughout the world. In addition, in some instances, the manufacturing of certain product lines is concentrated in 1 or more of our plants. The functioning of our manufacturing and distribution assets and systems could be disrupted for reasons either within or beyond our control, including extreme weather or longer term climatic changes; natural disasters; pandemic; war; accidental damage; disruption to the supply of material or services; product quality and safety issues; systems failure; workforce actions; or environmental contamination. There is a risk that incident management systems in place may prove inadequate and that any disruption may materially adversely affect our ability to make and sell products and, therefore, materially adversely affect our reputation, performance or financial condition. The medical technology industry is very competitive and customer demands and or new products in the marketplace could cause a reduction in demand. The medical technology industry is subject to rapid technological changes, and we face significant competition across our product lines and in each market in which our products are sold. We face this competition from a wide range of companies. These include large medical device companies, some of which have greater financial and marketing resources than we do. We also face competition from firms that are more specialized than we are with respect to particular markets. In some instances, competitors, including pharmaceutical companies, also offer, or are attempting to develop, alternative therapies for diseases that may be delivered without a medical device. The development of new or improved products, processes or technologies by other companies (such as needle free injection technology) may render some of our products or proposed products obsolete or less competitive. In addition, failure to meet increased customer quality expectations could cause a reduction in demand. Our international sales and operations are subject to risks and uncertainties that vary by country and which could have a material adverse effect on our business and or results of operations. We conduct business in most of the major pharmaceutical markets in the world. Our international operations and our ability to implement our overall business strategy (including our plan to continue expanding into emerging and or faster growing markets outside of the U.S.) are subject to risks and uncertainties that can vary by country, and include transportation delays and interruptions; political and economic instability and disruptions; imposition of duties and tariffs; import and export controls; the risks of divergent business expectations or cultural incompatibility inherent in establishing and maintaining operations in foreign countries; difficulties in staffing and managing multi national operations; labor strikes and or disputes; and potentially adverse tax consequences. Limitations on our ability to enforce legal rights and remedies with third parties or our joint venture partners outside of the U.S. could also create exposure. In addition, we may not be able to operate in compliance with foreign laws and regulations, or comply with applicable customs, currency exchange control regulations, transfer pricing regulations or any other laws or regulations to which we may be subject, in the event that these laws or regulations change. Any of these events could have an adverse effect on our international operations in the future by reducing the demand for our products, decreasing the prices at which we can sell our products or otherwise have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Disruptions in the supply of key raw materials could adversely impact our operations. We generally purchase our raw materials and supplies required for the production of our products in the open market. For reasons of quality assurance, sole source availability or cost effectiveness, many comp1nts and raw materials are available and or purchased only from a single supplier. Due to the stringent regulations and requirements of the FDA and other regulatory authorities regarding the manufacture of our products, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for these comp1nts or materials or do so without excessive cost. As a result, a reduction or interruption in manufacturing, or an inability to secure alternative sources of raw materials or comp1nts, could have a material adverse effect on our business and or results of operations. 12 Raw material and energy prices have a significant impact on our profitability. If raw material and or energy prices increase, and we cannot pass those price increases on to our customers, our profitability and financial condition may suffer. We use 3 basic raw materials in the manufacture of our products elastomers (which include synthetic and natural material), aluminum and plastic. In addition, our manufacturing facilities consume a wide variety of energy products to fuel, heat and cool our operations. Supply and demand factors, which are beyond our control, generally affect the price of our raw materials and utility costs. If we are unable to pass along increased raw material prices and energy costs to our customers, our profitability, and thus our financial condition, may be adversely affected. The prices of many of these raw materials and utilities are cyclical and volatile. For example, the prices of certain commodities, particularly petroleum based raw materials, have in the recent past exhibited rapid changes, affecting the cost of synthetic elastomers and plastic. While we generally attempt to pass along increased costs to our customers in the form of sales price increases, historically there has been a time delay between raw material and or energy price increases and our ability to increase the prices of our products. In some circumstances, we may not be able to increase the prices of our products due to competitive pressure and other factors. If we are not timely or successful in new product innovation or the development and commercialization of proprietary multi comp1nt systems, our future revenues and operating income could be adversely affected. Our growth partly depends on new product innovation and the development and commercialization of proprietary multi comp1nt systems for injectable drug administration and other healthcare applications (such as the Daikyo CZ ready to use prefilled syringes and the SmartDose systems). Product development and commercialization is inherently uncertain and is subject to a number of factors outside of our control, including any necessary regulatory approvals and commercial acceptance for the products. The ultimate timing and successful commercialization of new products and systems requires substantial evaluations of the functional, operational, clinical and economic viability of the Company's products. In addition, the timely and adequate availability of filling capacity is essential to both conducting definitive stability trials and the timing of first commercialization of customers' products in CZ prefilled syringes. Delays, interruptions or failures in developing and commercializing new product innovations or proprietary multi comp1nt systems could adversely affect future revenues and operating income. In addition, adverse conditions may also result in future charges to recognize impairment in the carrying value of our goodwill and other intangible assets, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial results. We may not succeed in finding and completing acquisition or other strategic transactions, if any, which could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations. We have historically engaged in acquisition activity and we may in the future engage in acquisitions or other strategic transactions, such as joint ventures or investments in other entities. We may be unable to identify suitable targets, opportunistic or otherwise, for acquisitions or other strategic transactions in the future. If we identify a suitable candidate, our ability to successfully implement the strategic transaction would depend on a variety of factors including our ability to obtain financing on acceptable terms, and to comply with the restrictions contained in our debt agreements. Strategic transactions involve risks, including those associated with integrating the operations or maintaining the operations as separate (as applicable), financial reporting, disparate technologies and personnel of acquired companies, joint ventures or related companies; managing geographically dispersed operations or other strategic investments; the diversion of management's attention from other business concerns; the inherent risks in entering markets or lines of business in which we have either limited or no direct experience; unknown risks; and the potential loss of key employees, customers and strategic partners of acquired companies, joint ventures or companies in which we may make strategic investments. We may not successfully integrate any businesses or technologies we may acquire or strategically develop in the future and may not achieve anticipated revenue and cost benefits relating to any such strategic transactions. Strategic transactions may be expensive, time consuming and may strain our resources. Strategic transactions may not be accretive to our earnings and may negatively impact our results of operations as a result of, among other things, the incurrence of debt, 1 time write offs of goodwill and amortization expenses of other intangible assets. In addition, strategic transactions that we may pursue could result in dilutive issuances of equity securities. 13 Product defects could adversely affect the results of our operations. The design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices involve certain inherent risks. Manufacturing or design defects, unanticipated use of our products, or inadequate disclosure of risks relating to the use of our products can lead to injury or other adverse events. These events could lead to recalls or safety alerts relating to our products (either voluntary or required by the FDA or similar governmental authorities in other countries), and could result, in certain cases, in the removal of a product from the market. A recall could result in significant costs, as well as negative publicity and damage to our reputation that could reduce demand for our products. Personal injuries relating to the use of our products can also result in product liability claims being brought against us. In some circumstances, such adverse events could also cause delays in new product approvals. Our operations must comply with environmental statutes and regulations, and any failure to comply could result in extensive costs which would harm our business. The manufacture of some of our products involves the use, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous or toxic materials and is subject to various environmental protection and occupational health and safety laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate. This has exposed us in the past, and could expose us in the future, to risks of accidental contamination and events of non compliance with environmental laws. Any such occurrences could result in regulatory enforcement or personal injury and property damage claims or could lead to a shutdown of some of our operations, which could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations. We currently incur costs to comply with environmental laws and regulations and these costs may become more significant. A loss of key personnel or highly skilled employees could disrupt our operations. Our executive officers are critical to the management and direction of our businesses. Our future success depends, in large part, on our ability to retain these officers and other key employees, including people in technical, marketing, sales and research positions. Competition for experienced employees, particularly for persons with specialized skills, can be intense. Our ability to recruit such talent will depend on a number of factors, including compensation and benefits, work location and work environment. If we cannot effectively recruit and retain qualified executives and employees, our business could be adversely affected. Although we believe that we will be able to attract and retain talented personnel and replace key personnel should the need arise, our inability to do so on a timely basis could disrupt the operations of the unit affected or our overall operations. In addition, because of the complex nature of many of our products and programs, we are generally dependent on an educated and highly skilled engineering staff and workforce. Our operations could be disrupted by a shortage of available skilled employees. The uncertain effects of potential climate change legislation could lead to significantly increased costs. If legislation or regulations are enacted or promulgated in the U.S., Europe or Asia or any other jurisdictions in which we do business that limit or reduce allowable greenhouse gas emissions and other emissions, such restrictions could have a significant effect on our operating and financial decisions, including those involving capital expenditures to reduce emissions, and our results of operations. Our manufacturing operations may not be able to operate as planned if we are not able to comply with new legal and regulatory legislation around climate change, or it may become too costly to operate in a profitable manner. Additionally, suppliers' added expenses could be passed on to us in the form of higher prices and we may not be able to pass on such expenses to our customers through price increases. 14 Federal healthcare reform may adversely affect our results of operations. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the PPACA ) was enacted in March 2010. The PPACA reduces Medicare and Medicaid payments to hospitals, clinical laboratories and pharmaceutical companies, and could otherwise reduce the volume of medical procedures. These factors, in turn, could result in reduced demand for our products and increased downward pricing pressure. It is also possible that the PPACA will result in lower reimbursements for our customers' products. While the PPACA is intended to expand health insurance coverage to uninsured persons in the U.S., the impact of any overall increase in access to healthcare on sales of West's products is uncertain at this time. Our sales depend, in part, on the extent to which pharmaceutical companies and healthcare providers and facilities are reimbursed by government authorities, private insurers and other third party payers for the costs of our products. The coverage policies and reimbursement levels of third party payers, which can vary among public and private sources, may affect which products customers purchase and the prices they are willing to pay for these products in a particular jurisdiction. Legislative or administrative reforms to reimbursement systems in the U.S. (as part of the PPACA) or abroad (for example, those under consideration in France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom) could significantly reduce reimbursement for our customers products, which could in turn reduce the demand for our products. Moreover, in the coming years, additional changes could be made to governmental healthcare programs that could significantly impact the success of our products. We will continue to evaluate the PPACA, as amended, the implementation of regulations or guidance related to various provisions of the PPACA by federal agencies, as well as trends and changes that may be encouraged by the legislation and that may potentially impact our business over time. No assurance can be given that we will continue to pay or declare dividends. We have historically paid dividends. However, there can be no assurance that we will pay or declare dividends in the future. The actual declaration and payment of future dividends, the amount of any such dividends, and the establishment of record and payment dates, if any, are subject to determination by our Board of Directors each quarter after its review of our then current strategy, applicable debt covenants and financial performance and position, among other things. Our declaration and payment of future dividends is subject to risks and uncertainties, including deterioration of our financial performance or position; inability to declare a dividend in compliance with applicable laws or debt covenants; an increase in our cash needs or decrease in available cash; and the business judgment of the Board of Directors that a declaration of a dividend is not in the Company's best interests. Our results of operations and earnings may not meet guidance or expectations . We provide public guidance on our expected results of operations for future periods. This guidance is comprised of forward looking statements subject to risks and uncertainties, including the risks and uncertainties described in this Form 10 K and in our other public filings and public statements, and is based necessarily on assumptions we make at the time we provide such guidance. Our guidance may not always be accurate. If, in the future, our results of operations for a particular period do not meet our guidance or the expectations of investment analysts or if we reduce our guidance for future periods, the market price of our common stock could decline significantly. We are exposed to credit risk on accounts receivable and certain prepayments made in the normal course of business. This risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen. A substantial majority of our outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance. In addition, we have made prepayments associated with insurance premiums and other advances in the normal course of business. While we have procedures to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on trade receivables and other current assets, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit our credit risk and avoid losses, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results. 15 Unauthorized access to our or our customers' information and systems could negatively impact our business. We may face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. We maintain an extensive ne2rk of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms and monitoring systems in order to address these threats. While these measures are designed to prevent, detect and respond to unauthorized activity in our systems, certain types of attacks could result in financial or information losses and or reputational harm. If we cannot prevent the unauthorized access, release and or corruption of our or our customers' confidential, classified or personally identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged, and or we could face financial losses. If we fail to comply with our obligations under our distributorship or license agreements with Daikyo or we are unable to renew these agreements on the same or substantially similar terms, we could lose license rights that are important to our business. Key value added and proprietary products and processes are licensed from our affiliate, Daikyo, including but not limited to Daikyo CZ, FluroTec and B2 coating technologies. Our rights to these products and processes are licensed pursuant to agreements that expire in 2017, which we expect to renew prior to their expiration. However, if we are unsuccessful in renewing these agreements, or if the agreements are terminated early because we fail to satisfy our obligations, our business could be adversely impacted. Item 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS As of the filing of this Form 10 K, there were no unresolved comments from the Staff of the SEC. 16 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
