CIK: 1100441
Company Name: RTI SURGICAL INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2015-03-04
Accession Number: 0001193125-15-076985


Item 1 BUSINESS. Company Overview We are a leader in the use of natural tissues, metals and synthetics to produce orthopedic and other surgical implants that repair and promote the natural healing of human b1 and other human tissues and improve surgical outcomes. We process donated human musculoskeletal and other tissue, including b1, cartilage, tendon, ligament, fascia lata, pericardium, sclera and dermal tissue, and bovine and porcine animal tissue in producing allograft and xenograft implants utilizing proprietary BIOCLEANSE , TUTOPLAST and CANCELLE SP sterilization processes and manufacture metal and synthetic implants for distribution to hospitals and surgeons. We process tissue at 2 facilities in Alachua, Florida and 1 facility in Neunkirchen, Germany, and manufacture metal and synthetic implants in Marquette, Michigan and Greenville, North Carolina. We distribute our implants and services in all 50 states and in over 45 countries worldwide. We distribute human tissue, bovine and porcine animal tissue, metal and synthetic implants through various distribution channels. Our lines of business are comprised primarily of six categories spine, sports medicine, ortho fixation, b1 graft substitutes and general orthopedic ( BGS and general orthopedic ), surgical specialties and dental. The following table presents revenues from these six categories and other revenues and their respective percentages of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 Year Ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 (In thousands) Revenues Spine $ 82,663 315 % $ 57,334 28.9 % $ 38,866 219 % Sports medicine 46,758 17.8 % 42,594 215 % 51,197 28.7 % Ortho fixation 37,133 14.1 % 14,525 7.3 % BGS and general orthopedic 36,747 14.0 % 27,864 14.1 % 29,308 16.5 % Surgical specialties 26,999 10.3 % 27,666 14.0 % 30,897 17.3 % Dental 20,810 7.9 % 19,779 10.0 % 21,435 120 % Other revenues 11,700 4.5 % 8,217 4.2 % 6,410 36 % Total revenues $ 262,810 100.0 % $ 197,979 100.0 % $ 178,113 100.0 % Domestic revenues $ 238,936 90.9 % $ 177,207 89.5 % $ 156,803 88.0 % International revenues 23,874 9.1 % 20,772 10.5 % 21,310 120 % Total revenues $ 262,810 100.0 % $ 197,979 100.0 % $ 178,113 100.0 % 1 Table of Contents For additional financial information concerning our operating performance, please refer to Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in I, Item 7 of this report and our Consolidated Financial Statements in I, Item 8 of this report. Corporate Information We were incorporated in 1997 in Florida as a wholly owned subsidiary of the University of Florida Tissue Bank, ( UFTB ). We began operations on February 12, 1998 when UFTB contributed to us its allograft processing operations, related equipment and technologies, distribution arrangements, research and development activities and certain other assets. At the time of our initial public offering in August 2000, we reincorporated in the State of Delaware. In July 2013, we completed our acquisition of Pi1er Surgical Technology, Inc. ( Pi1er ) and in connection with the acquisition changed our name from RTI Biologics, Inc. to RTI Surgical, Inc. The results of Pi1er operations have been included in our consolidated financial statements since the date of acquisition. Our principal offices are located at 11621 Research Circle, Alachua, Florida, and our ph1 number is (386) 418 8888. Industry Overview Defects in b1 and other human tissue can be caused by a variety of sources including trauma, congenital defects, aging, revision of joint replacements, infectious disease, cancer and other similar conditions. The predominant method used to repair injured or defective tissue is surgical intervention, primarily through the use of surgical implants. When considering a surgical procedure for tissue repair, surgeons and patients have a number of treatment options including metals and synthetics; xenograft tissue from an animal source; autograft tissue from the patient; and allograft tissue from another human donor. Depending on the specific surgery, surgeons may elect to use any number of these treatment options. We offer a broad line of metal, synthetic, xenograft and allograft solutions to meet their needs. Metals and Synthetics The medical community has used metal and synthetic materials for implant procedures for many years. Metal and synthetic technologies are used to create both surgical implants as well as instruments used in surgical procedures. These implants are used in a variety of procedures in spine, cardiothoracic, trauma and other areas. Typical metals used include surgical stainless steel and titanium. These materials are chosen for their strength and durability. Synthetic implants provide alternative implant options for surgeons and also increase availability due to the variable supply of allograft. 1 common example of a synthetic material is polyetheretherkeyt1 ( PEEK ). Xenograft Tissue Xenograft tissue based implants are common in many areas of medicine including cardiac and vascular procedures, soft tissue repair and wound care. Xenograft based implants are also used in the repair of b1 defects in orthopedic surgery as carriers for demineralized b1 matrix and b1 morphogenic protein products. The production of xenograft implants involves recovering animal tissue, typically from cattle (bovine) or pigs (porcine), processing and sterilization, and then transplanting the xenograft implant into a human patient. 2 Table of Contents Autograft and Allograft Tissue Many surgeons use autograft and allograft tissue in their surgical procedures to take advantage of their natural characteristics. Autograft procedures involve a surgeon harvesting tissue from 1 part of a patient body for transplant to another part of the body. Allograft tissues are recovered from cadaveric donors, processed for certain intended uses and then transplanted by a surgeon into the patient body to make the needed repair. Autograft and allograft b1 implants are not only osteoconductive, meaning they provide a scaffold for new b1 to attach itself to, but can be osteoinductive as well, meaning they stimulate the growth of new tissue. A significant drawback to autograft procedures is that they require an additional surgery to recover the tissue from a second site in the patient body. Often in autograft procedures, the site where the patient tissue is harvested becomes painful and uncomfortable, and can take longer to heal than the primary surgical site. Additional complications can involve infection, nerve and arterial injury and joint instability. Moreover, a patient may not have sufficient quantities of quality autograft tissue for transplant procedures. Marketing and Distribution Our implants are used primarily in the following markets spine, sports medicine, ortho fixation, BGS and general orthopedic, surgical specialties and dental. Our current implants range from allografts, xenografts, synthetics and metals that are precision machined for specific surgical applications to grafts conventionally processed for general surgical uses. Spine We design, manufacture, and distribute surgical implants and instruments used in the treatment of conditions affecting the spine and musculoskeletal system caused by degenerative conditions, deformities or traumatic injury of the spine. Our surgical implants include allograft and synthetic interbodies, b1 graft substitutes, rods, pedicle screws and plates. Our spine allografts are marketed domestically through our non exclusive relationships with Aesculap Implant Systems, Inc. ( Aesculap ), Alphatec Spine, Inc. ( Alphatec ), Integra Life Sciences Corporation ( Integra ), Medtronic, plc. ( Medtronic ), Orthofix International NV ( Orthofix ), Stryker Spine a division of Stryker Corporation ( Stryker ), and Zimmer, Inc. ( Zimmer ). Our spine metals and synthetics are marketed through a ne2rk of independent distributors. Sports Medicine Many repetitive use and sports related injuries can be addressed with allograft implants. The most prevalent surgeries in the knee include repairs to the anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ), articular cartilage repair, and meniscus transplantation. The most prevalent surgeries in the shoulder include rotator cuff repair and articular cartilage repair. Our principal sports medicine allografts are tendons for ligament reconstruction, fresh osteochondral grafts for cartilage repair, and our meniscal allografts for advanced meniscus injuries. Many of our sports medicine tendon allografts utilize our patented pre shaped technology, which greatly reduces preparation time in the operating room and are generally easier to implant as compared to non pre shaped allografts. We also distribute Matrix HD human dermis implants for wound repair and soft tissue augmentation. Our sports medicine implants such as our BioCleanse Meniscus, BioCleanse full tendon portfolio, fresh stored osteochondral ( OC ) allograft portfolio, and our Matrix HD are marketed domestically through our direct biologics representatives and through our ne2rk of independent distributors and internationally through a ne2rk of independent distributors. 3 Table of Contents Ortho fixation Ortho fixation includes instruments and implants for trauma and cardio thoracic markets. Our trauma implants include devices used to stabilize damaged or broken b1s. Our cardio thoracic implants include cable and plating systems used to close median sternotomies. Our trauma implants are distributed through Zimmer and DePuy Synthes ( Synthes ), a Johnson & Johnson Inc. subsidiary. Our cardio thoracic implants are distributed through a direct distribution organization and a ne2rk of independent distributors. BGS and general orthopedic map3 . Our map3 cellular allogeneic b1 graft is a natural and safe alternative to autograft that supports the body innate healing mechanisms and provides the scaffold and signals to support the b1 healing process. The implant contains the 3 essential elements of b1 formation, namely osteogenesis, osteoinduction and osteoconduction. nanOss . Our nanOss advanced b1 graft substitute is composed of nano structured hydroxyapatite granules suspended in a porous gelatin based foam matrix. Allograft Paste. Surgeons principally use our allograft paste implants, which are composed of demineralized b1 matrix ( DBM ) and in some cases a biologic gel carrier, in fracture treatment, b1 and joint reconstruction and periodontal applications, such as ridge augmentation for dental implants. Our allograft paste implants are marketed under Osteofil by Medtronic, Puros DBM by Zimmer and the Optefil , Opteform , Regenafil and Regenaform brands with Exactech, Inc. ( Exactech ) and we distribute directly the BioSet DBM, BioReady DBM and BioAdapt DBM families of paste implants through our direct representatives, a ne2rk of independent distributors and our international distribution ne2rk. Our DBM Boat implants are marketed under BIO DBM by Stryker. Milled Allograft and Xenograft. Our b1 graft substitutes business also includes certain types of blended and milled b1 allografts and xenografts, such as our demineralized b1 matrix, cortical cancellous chips and ground cancellous chips, used in total hip and knee replacements and for various traumatic injuries. Conventional Allografts. Our conventional allograft business includes a wide variety of allograft categories including our intercalary grafts, such as our large structural grafts, which are used for cancer treatment procedures and hip and knee reconstruction. We also produce various types of fashi1d b1, such as strips and shafts used for various orthopedic procedures. Surgical Specialties We process and distribute implants for surgical specialties, which include abdominal wall repair, plastic and reconstructive surgery, ophthalmology and urology. The company distributes xenograft and allograft implants through our direct distribution organization Fortiva porcine dermis, Tutopatch and Tutomesh bovine pericardium, and Cortiva human dermis. These implants are all processed through our validated Tutoplast tissue sterilization process, which has a proven track record of safety and performance. These implants are positi1d to surgeons in various surgical specialties, including general, colon and rectal, trauma, bariatric, and plastic reconstructive surgery. We also distribute implants through distributors including; Integra for dural repair applications, Davol, Inc., a subsidiary of C. R. Bard, Inc. ( Davol ) for hernia repair and breast reconstruction, IOP, Inc. ( IOP ) for ophthalmology and Coloplast A S of Denmark ( Coloplast ) for urology. 4 Table of Contents Dental We currently provide various implants including cancellous and cortical b1 and human and bovine membranes primarily for dental procedures related to augmenting ridge restoration. We distribute our dental implants exclusively through Zimmer. The BioCleanse Tissue Sterilization Process We have developed and utilized in the United States the patented BioCleanse tissue sterilization process, which is an automated, pharmaceutical grade chemical sterilization process for musculoskeletal b1 and certain soft tissue. This process is fully validated to kill or inactivate all classes of conventional pathogens, viruses, microbes, bacteria and fungi. Our BioCleanse process is able to remove greater than 99% of the blood, fats, lipids and other unwanted materials from the tissue we process. An important element of the BioCleanse process is that while it removes unwanted materials embedded within the tissue, it maintains the tissue structural integrity and compression strength. Studies have shown that b1 tissue sterilized with the BioCleanse process maintains the same compression strength as untreated tissue. The BioCleanse process has been reviewed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) which concluded that BioCleanse was a validated tissue sterilization process demonstrated to prevent contamination of tissue grafts. The significance of the review is that we are not aware of any other tissue sterilization process related to human tissue in our industry that has been reviewed or approved by the FDA. The FDA does not have a formal approval process in place for tissue related processing techniques. The TUTOPLAST Tissue Sterilization Process The TUTOPLAST tissue sterilization process utilizes solvent dehydration and chemical inactivation to remove blood, lipids and extraneous materials, and inactivate viruses and break down RNA and DNA into fragments not capable of replication and disease transmission while preserving the biological and mechanical properties. We apply the TUTOPLAST process to 2 types of preserved allografts soft tissue, consisting of fascia lata, pericardium, dermis, sclera and cornea; and b1 tissue, consisting of various configurations of cancellous and cortical b1 material. Processed pericardium, fascia lata and dermis are collagenous tissue used to repair, replace or line native connective tissue primarily in dental, ophthalmology, urology, plastic and reconstructive surgeries. Dermis is also used in hernia repair and pelvic floor reconstruction. Sclera and cornea are used in ophthalmology procedures such as anterior and posterior segment patch grafting applications for glaucoma, retina and trauma surgery and oculoplastics, as well as contour wrapping of an orbital implant. Processed cortical and cancellous b1 material is used in a wide variety of applications in spine, orthopedic and dental surgeries. The CANCELLE SP DBM Sterilization Process DBM based pastes and putties are sterilized through the CANCELLE SP process, which is designed to preserve protein activity. In their final form, the DBM implants serve as b1 void fillers in many applications, including spinal, general orthopedic, joint reconstruction and dental surgeries. CANCELLE SP is a proprietary process that sterilizes DBM pastes and putties while simultaneously allowing them to maintain their osteoinductive ( OI ) potential, which is verified by 100 percent lot testing after sterilization. The determination of OI potential is made by lot release animal studies or testing for certain protein markers. These tests are not necessarily predictive of human clinical results. Through a combination of oxidative treatments and acid or alcohol washes, debris is removed and pathogens are inactivated. Cleansing rinses remove residual chemicals, maintaining biocompatibility and preserving the utility of the graft. The CANCELLE SP irradiation dose is delivered terminally for most pastes and putties to achieve device level sterility ( SAL 10 6 ). 5 Table of Contents Tissue Recovery Tissue recovery is the actual removal of tissue from a donor after receiving appropriate consent. Consent is obtained by the tissue recovery group. We operate certain tissue recovery groups directly, and contract with other independent FDA registered tissue recovery groups which specialize in this activity. Tissue recovery personnel aseptically recover musculoskeletal tissue within 24 hours following a donor death, using surgical instruments and sterile techniques similar to those used in hospitals for routine surgery. Recovered tissue is placed on wet or dry ice and then transported by the donor recovery agency to the tissue processor or possibly a research institution. Under U.S. law, human tissue cannot be sold. However, the law permits the recovery of reasonable payments for the provision of certain services, such as those involved in recovering, processing and storing tissue and related to the advancement of tissue processing technologies, all types of activities in which we are involved. Donor recovery groups recover a variety of tissue types from donors including the fibula, femur, tibia, humerus, ilium, pericardium, fascia lata, dermis, b1 marrow, sclera, tendons and ligaments. In addition to tissue received from recovery groups we control, we also receive donated tissue from independently registered tissue recovery organizations. To make an initial determination as to whether tissues may be appropriately recovered, these independent tissue recovery organizations are responsible for obtaining appropriate consents and conducting federally mandated donor screening, such as a medical and social history interview with the next of kin. Upon receipt of the tissue, we conduct pre processing donor screening to determine its medical suitability for transplantation. Pre processing screening performed by us includes laboratory testing and a donor eligibility assessment. With respect to laboratory testing, we perform an extensive panel of serological and microbiological tests. These results are subject to stringent criteria in order to release the donor tissue to the processing stage. We have relationships with tissue donor recovery agencies across the United States. We also have relationships outside the United States. We believe additional recovery group relationships would be available if needed and consequently that the loss of any 1 of our sources of donor tissue would not have a material impact on our operating results. We continue to develop new xenograft tissue implants. Implants processed from xenograft tissue are regulated by the FDA as devices and require approval or licenses from the FDA prior to marketing in the United States. The sources of our bovine animal tissues are regulated closed herds. We believe the continued development of our xenograft implants will help us meet unmet demand for certain allografts and also allow us to develop new biological implants that cannot currently be made due to structural limitations of human tissue. Research and Development Our research and development ( R&D ) costs for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 were $15.5 million, $15.2 million and $122 million, respectively. In 2014, we continued to increase our investment in our R&D efforts by funding new projects including research and development projects at our facilities in our US locations and in Neunkirchen, Germany. We plan to continue to develop new implants and technologies within our current markets, and to develop additional technologies for other markets to address unmet clinical needs. We plan to do this by building on our core technology platforms BIOCLEANSE , TUTOPLAST , CANCELLE SP, precision machining, assembled grafts, tissue mediated osteoinduction and our metal and synthetics design and production expertise. We operate a dedicated research team working on advanced technologies, and have embedded development technical teams who work with the business marketing teams focused on expanding the scope and scale of existing competencies such as tissue machining and sterilization, and metal and synthetics manufacturing to meet specific surgical needs. This approach has resulted in the development of core science platforms, a pipeline of concepts for development and marketing, and focused projects to meet immediate needs. 6 Table of Contents In 2014, we launched 23 new implants in spine, sports medicine, BGS and general orthopedics and surgical specialties developed by our research and development teams. Intellectual Property Our business depends upon the significant know how and proprietary technology we have developed. To protect this know how and proprietary technology, we rely on a combination of trade secret laws, patents, licenses, trademarks and confidentiality agreements. The effect of these intellectual property rights is to define z1s of exclusive use of the covered intellectual property. The duration of patent rights generally is 20 years from the date of filing of priority application, while trademarks, once registered, are essentially perpetual. Our trademarks and service marks provide us and our implants with a certain amount of brand recognition in our markets. However, we do not consider any single patent, trademark or service mark material to our business strategy, financial condition or results of operations. We have also entered into exclusive and non exclusive licenses relating to a wide array of third party technologies. In addition, we rely on our substantial body of know how, including proprietary tissue recovery techniques and processes, research and development, tissue processing and quality assurance. Our proprietary BIOCLEANSE , TUTOPLAST and CANCELLE SP sterilization processes are covered by 1 or more U.S. and or foreign patents, patent applications or trade secrets. Other U.S. and foreign holdings include patents, patent applications or trade secrets relating to or covering certain precision machined allograft intervertebral spacers and other spinal implants; matrix compositions including various b1 graft substitutes; membrane tissue implants; and ligament, tendon or meniscus reconstruction and repair with certain precision shaped and or assembled b1 and soft tissue implants, synthetic b1 graft substitutes; interbody fusion and motion implants; spinal and orthopedic plates; spinal rods, cables and screws and spinal fixation systems and related instrumentation. The medical device industry is characterized by the existence of a large number of patents and frequent litigation based on allegations of patent infringement. As the number of entrants into our market increases, the risk of an infringement claim against us grows. While we attempt to ensure that our implants and methods do not infringe other parties patents and proprietary rights, our competitors may assert that our implants, and the methods we employ, are covered by patents held by them. In addition, our competitors may assert that future implants and methods we may employ infringe their patents. If third parties claim that we infringe upon their intellectual property rights, we may incur liabilities and costs and may have to redesign or discontinue selling the affected implant. Even if we were to prevail, any litigation could be costly and time consuming and would divert the attention of our management and key personnel from our business operations. We have in the past been, and may in the future be, involved in litigation relating to our intellectual property. Competition Competition in the medical implant industry is intense and subject to rapid technological change and evolving industry requirements and standards. Companies within the industry compete on the basis of design of related instrumentation, efficacy of implants, relationships with the surgical community, depth of range of implants, scientific and clinical results and pricing. Our principal competitors in the conventional allograft market include the Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation ( MTF ), AlloSource Inc., LifeCell, Inc., a subsidiary of Acelity L.P. Inc. and LifeNet Health, Inc. ( LifeNet ). Among our competitors in precision machined allograft are MTF, LifeNet and AlloSource. Other companies who process and distribute allograft pastes include Medtronic, AlloSource, Integra, Wright Medical Inc. and MTF. Companies who process and distribute xenograft tissue include Baxter, Inc., LifeCell, Cook Surgical and Medtronic. We consider our principal competitors in the metal and synthetic markets to include Alphatec, Globus Medical, Inc. ( Globus ), NuVasive, Inc. ( NuVasive ) and Orthofix. 7 Table of Contents Government Regulation and Corporate Compliance Government Regulation Government regulation plays a significant role in the processing manufacturing and distribution of allograft tissue implants and medical devices. We procure, where applicable, process manufacture, and market our allograft tissue implants and medical devices worldwide. Although some standards of harmonization exist, each country in which we do business has its own specific regulatory requirements. These requirements are dynamic in nature and, as such, are continually changing. New regulations may be promulgated at any time and with limited notice. While we believe that we are in compliance with all existing pertinent international and domestic laws and regulations, there can be no assurance that changes in governmental administrations and regulations will not adversely affect our operations. Failure to comply with applicable requirements could result in fines, injunctions, civil penalties, recall or seizure of products, suspension of production, inability to market current products, criminal prosecution, and or refusal of the government to authorize the marketing of new products. In the United States, our allograft implants are regulated by the FDA under Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Parts 1270 and 1271, Current Good Tissue Practice for Human Cell, Tissue, and Cellular and Tissue Based Products ( cGTP ). Xenograft tissues and allograft b1 paste are regulated as medical devices and subject to FDA 21 CFR, Part 820 Current Good Manufacturing Practices for Medical Devices and related statutes from the FDA. In addition, our U.S. operation is subject to certain state and local regulations, as well as compliance to the standards of the tissue bank industry accrediting organization, the American Association of Tissue Banks, ( AATB ). In Germany, allografts are classified as drugs and the German government regulates such implants in accordance with German Drug Law. On April 7, 2004, the European Commission issued a human tissue directive to regulate allografts within the European Union ( EU ). Our Neunkirchen facility is presently licensed by the German Health Authorities and in compliance with applicable international laws and regulations, allowing us to market our human and animal tissue implants globally. The FDA and international regulatory bodies conduct periodic compliance inspections of both our U.S. and our German processing facilities. All operations are registered with the U.S. FDA Center for Devices and Radiological Health ( CDRH ) for device manufacturing locations and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ) for human tissue recovery, processing and distribution locations and are certified to ISO 134852003 The Alachua facility is also accredited by the AATB and is licensed in the states of Florida, New York, California, Maryland, Delaware and Illinois. The Neunkirchen facility is registered with the German Health Authority ( BfArM ) as a pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturer and is subject to German drug law. We believe that worldwide regulation of allografts and xenografts is likely to intensify as the international regulatory community focuses on the growing demand for these implants and the attendant safety and efficacy issues of citizen recipients. We currently market and distribute allografts that are subject to the FDA Human Tissue Intended for Transplantation and Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue Based Products regulations. Under these regulations, we are required to perform donor screening and infectious disease testing and to document this screening and testing for each donor from whom we process tissue, and to process tissues in compliance with cGTP. The FDA has authority under the rules to inspect human tissue processing facilities, and to detain, recall, or destroy tissues for which appropriate documentation and evidence of compliance is not available. We are not required to obtain pre market approval or clearance from the FDA for allografts that meet the regulation definition of human tissue. The FDA may regulate certain allografts as medical devices, drugs, or biologics, which would require that we obtain approval or product licensure from the FDA. This would occur in those cases where the allograft is deemed to have been more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use. In general, homologous use occurs when tissue is used for the same basic function that it fulfilled in the donor. The 8 Table of Contents definitional criteria for making these determinations appear in the FDA rules. If the FDA decides that certain of our current or future allografts are more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use, it would require licensure, approval or clearances of those allografts. Allografts requiring such approval are subject to pervasive and continuing regulation by the FDA. We would be required to list these allografts as a drug, as a medical device, or as a biologic, and to manufacture them in specifically registered or licensed facilities in accordance with FDA regulation Current Good Manufacturing Practices. We would also be subject to post marketing surveillance and reporting requirements. In addition, our manufacturing facilities and processes would be subject to periodic inspection to assess compliance with Current Good Manufacturing Practices. Our labeling and promotional activities would be subject to scrutiny by the FDA and, in certain instances, by the Federal Trade Commission. The export of drugs, devices and biologics is also subject to more intensive regulation than is the case for human tissue implants. Our research, development and clinical programs, as well as our manufacturing and marketing operations, are subject to extensive regulation in the United States and other countries. Most notably, all of our implants sold in the United States are subject to the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Public Health Services Act as implemented and enforced by the FDA. The regulations that cover our implants and facilities vary widely based on implant type and classification both in the United States, and from country to country. The amount of time required to obtain approvals or clearances from regulatory authorities also differs from country to country. Unless an exemption applies, each medical device that we wish to commercially distribute in the United States will be covered by either premarket notification ( 510(k) ) clearance or approval of a premarket approval application ( PMA ) from the FDA. The FDA classifies medical devices into 1 of 3 classes. Devices deemed to pose lower risks are placed in either class I or II, which typically requires the manufacturer to submit to the FDA a premarket notification requesting permission to commercially distribute the device. This process is generally known as 510(k) clearance. Some low risk devices are exempted from this requirement. Devices deemed by the FDA to pose the greatest risks, such as life sustaining, life supporting or implantable devices, or devices deemed not substantially equivalent to a previously cleared 510(k) device, are placed in class III, requiring approval through the lengthy PMA process. Manufacturers of most class II medical devices are required to obtain 510(k) clearance prior to marketing their devices. To obtain 510(k) clearance, a company must submit a premarket notification demonstrating that the proposed device is substantially equivalent in intended use and in technological and performance characteristics to another legally marketed 510(k) cleared predicate device. By regulation, the FDA is required to clear or deny a 510(k) premarket notification within 90 days of submission of the application. As a practical matter, clearance may take longer. The FDA may require further information, including clinical data, to make a determination regarding substantial equivalence. After a device receives 510(k) clearance, any modification that could significantly affect its safety or effectiveness, or that would constitute a major change in its intended use, requires a new 510(k) clearance or could require a PMA approval. Class III medical devices are required to undergo the PMA approval process in which the manufacturer must establish the safety and effectiveness of the device to the FDA satisfaction. A PMA application must provide extensive preclinical and clinical trial data and also information about the device and its comp1nts regarding, among other things, device design, manufacturing and labeling. Also during the review period, an advisory panel of experts from outside the FDA may be convened to review and evaluate the application and provide recommendations to the FDA as to the approvability of the device. In addition, the FDA will typically conduct a preapproval inspection of the manufacturing facility to ensure compliance with quality system regulations. FDA reviews of PMA applications, generally can take between 1 and 3 years, or longer. The medical devices that we develop, manufacture, distribute and market are subject to rigorous regulation by the FDA and numerous other federal, state and foreign governmental authorities. The process of obtaining FDA clearance and other regulatory approvals to develop and market a medical device, particularly from the FDA, can be costly and time consuming, and there can be no assurance that such approvals will be granted on a timely basis, if at all. While we believe that we have obtained all necessary clearances and approvals for the manufacture and sale of our implants and that they are in material compliance with applicable FDA and other 9 Table of Contents material regulatory requirements, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue such compliance. After a device is placed on the market, numerous regulatory requirements continue to apply. Those regulatory requirements include product listing and establishment registration; Quality System Regulation ( QSR ) which requires manufacturers, including third party manufacturers, to follow stringent design, testing, control, documentation and other quality assurance procedures during all aspects of the manufacturing process; labeling regulations and FDA prohibitions against the promotion of products for uncleared, unapproved or off label uses or indications; clearance of product modifications that could significantly affect safety or efficacy or that would constitute a major change in intended use of 1 of our cleared devices; approval of product modifications that affect the safety or effectiveness of 1 of our PMA approved devices; Medical Device Reporting regulations, which require that manufacturers report to FDA if their device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury, or has malfuncti1d in a way that would likely cause or contribute to a death or serious injury if the malfunction of the device or a similar device were to recur; post approval restrictions or conditions, including post approval study commitments; post market surveillance regulations, which apply when necessary to protect the public health or to provide additional safety and effectiveness data for the device; the FDA recall authority, whereby it can ask, or under certain conditions order, device manufacturers to recall from the market a product that is in violation of governing laws and regulations; regulations pertaining to voluntary recalls; and notices of corrections or removals. We and certain of our suppliers also are subject to announced and unannounced inspections by the FDA to determine our compliance with FDA QSR and other regulations. If the FDA were to find that we or certain of our suppliers have failed to comply with applicable regulations, the agency could institute a wide variety of enforcement actions, ranging from a public warning letter to more severe sanctions such as fines and civil penalties against us, our officers, our employees or our suppliers; unanticipated expenditures to address or defend such actions; delays in clearing or approving, or refusal to clear or approve, our products; withdrawal or suspension of approval of our products or those of our third party suppliers by the FDA or other regulatory bodies; product recall or seizure; interruption of production; operating restrictions; injunctions; and criminal prosecution. Moreover, governmental authorities outside the United States have become increasingly stringent in their regulation of medical devices, and our products may become subject to more rigorous regulation by non U.S. governmental authorities in the future. U.S. or non U.S. government regulations may be imposed in the future that may have a material adverse effect on our business and operations. The European Commission ( EC ) has harmonized national regulations for the control of medical devices through European Medical Device Directives with which manufacturers must comply. Under these new regulations, manufacturing plants must have received CE certification from a notified body in order to be able to sell products within the member states of the European Union. Certification allows manufacturers to stamp the products of certified plants with a CE mark. Products covered by the EC regulations that do not bear the CE mark cannot be sold or distributed within the European Union. We have received certification for all currently existing manufacturing facilities and products. Our products may be reimbursed by third party payors, such as government programs, including Medicare, Medicaid, and Tricare or private insurance plans and healthcare ne2rks. Third party payors may deny reimbursement if they determine that a device provided to a patient or used in a procedure does not meet applicable payment criteria or if the policy holder healthcare insurance benefits are limited. Also, third party payors are increasingly challenging the medical necessity and prices paid for our products and services. Civil False Claims Act and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 ( HIPAA ) as well as numerous state laws regulate healthcare and insurance. These laws are enforced by the Office of Inspector General within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the U.S. Department of Justice, and other federal, state and local agencies. Among other things, these laws and others generally (1) prohibit the provision of anything of value in exchange for the referral of patients for, or the purchase, order, or recommendation of, any item or service reimbursed by a federal healthcare program, (including Medicare and Medicaid); (2) require that claims for payment submitted to federal healthcare programs be truthful; (3) prohibit the transmission of protected healthcare information to persons not authorized to receive that information; and (4) require the maintenance of certain government licenses and permits. 10 Table of Contents In addition, U.S. federal and state laws protect the confidentiality of certain health information, in particular individually identifiable information such as medical records and restrict the use and disclosure of that protected information. At the federal level, the Department of Health and Human Services promulgated health information privacy and security rules under HIPAA. These rules protect health information by regulating its use and disclosure, including for research and other purposes. Failure of a HIPAA covered entity to comply with HIPAA regarding such protected health information could constitute a violation of federal law, subject to civil and criminal penalties. Covered entities include healthcare providers (including those that sell devices or equipment) that engage in particular electronic transactions, including the transmission of claims to health plans. Consequently, health information that we access, collect, analyze, and otherwise use and or disclose includes protected health information that is subject to HIPAA. As noted above, many state laws also pertain to the confidentiality of health information. Such laws are not necessarily preempted by HIPAA, in particular those state laws that afford greater privacy protection to the individual than HIPAA. These state laws typically have their own penalty provisions, which could be applied in the event of an unlawful action affecting health information. In the quarter ended September 30, 2014, we received a letter from the FDA regarding our map3 cellular allogeneic b1 graft. The letter addresses some technical aspects of the processing of the map3 allograft, as well as language included on our website. We have submitted an initial response to the FDA letter, and have prepared a comprehensive package of data to address the FDA comments and provide clarifying information regarding the technical comp1nts of the implant processing. We believe that in both developing and processing of map3 , we have properly considered the relevant regulatory requirements. Additionally, we have removed the relevant information from the website pending thorough review and revisions as needed. We are committed to resolving the concerns raised by the FDA. However, it is not possible to predict the specific outcome or timing of a resolution at this time. On October 23, 2012, we received a warning letter from the FDA related to environmental monitoring activities in certain areas of our processing facility in Alachua, Florida. In September 2013 the FDA performed a follow up close out inspection for the warning letter. The FDA accepted and recognized the corrective actions taken by us and we received a final close out letter on October 29, 2013 with no further findings or observations. Corporate Compliance On February 1, 2013, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) published a final rule which requires making information publicly available about payments or other transfers of value from certain manufacturers of drugs, devices, biologicals and medical supplies covered by Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ), defined as applicable manufacturers, to physicians and teaching hospitals, which are defined as covered recipients. Called the National Physician Payment Transparency Program Open Payments, this is 1 of many steps in the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) designed to create greater transparency in health care markets. The ACA specified that applicable manufacturers must report annually to the Secretary of Health and Human Services all payments or transfers of value (including gifts, consulting fees, research activities, speaking fees, meals, and travel) from applicable manufacturers to covered recipients. In addition to reporting on payments, applicable manufacturers, as well as applicable GPOs, must report ownership and investment interests held by physicians (or the immediate family members of physicians) in such entities. The ACA requires CMS to provide applicable manufacturers, applicable GPOs, covered recipients, and physician owners and investors at least 45 days to review, dispute and correct their reported information before posting it on a publicly available website. We have a comprehensive compliance program. It is a fundamental policy of our company to conduct business in accordance with the highest ethical and legal standards. Our corporate compliance and ethics program is designed to promote legal compliance and ethical business practices throughout our domestic and international businesses. 11 Table of Contents Our compliance program is designed to meet U.S. Sentencing Commission Guidelines for effective organizational compliance and ethics programs and to prevent and detect violations of applicable federal, state and local laws. Key elements of our compliance program include Organizational oversight by senior level personnel responsible for the compliance functions within our company. Written standards and procedures, including a Code of Business Conduct. Methods for communicating compliance concerns, including anonymous reporting mechanisms. Investigation and remediation measures to ensure prompt response to reported matters and timely corrective action. Compliance education and training for employees and contracted business associates such as distributors. Auditing and monitoring controls to promote compliance with applicable laws and assess program effectiveness. Disciplinary guidelines to enforce compliance and address violations. Screening of employees and contracted business associates. Risk assessments to identify areas of regulatory compliance risk. Environmental Our allografts and xenografts, as well as the chemicals used in processing natural tissues and also in the manufacturing of metal and synthetic implants, are handled and disposed of in accordance with country specific, federal, provincial, regional, state and or local regulations, as applicable. We contract with independent, third parties to perform all gamma terminal sterilization of our surgical implants. In view of the engagement of a third party to perform irradiation services, the requirements for compliance with radiation hazardous waste do not apply, and therefore we do not anticipate that having any material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures, results of operations or financial condition. However, we are responsible for assuring that the service is being performed in accordance with applicable regulations. Employees As of December 31, 2014, we had a total of 1,102 employees of which 187 were employed outside of the United States. Management believes its relations with its employees are good. Available Information Our Internet address is www.rtix.com. Information included on our website is not incorporated by reference in our Form 10 K. We make available, free of charge, on or through the investor relations portion of our website, our annual reports on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q and current reports on Form 8 K and amendments to such reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), as soon as reasonably practicable after we file such material with, or furnish it to the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). These filings are also available on the SEC website at www.sec.gov. Also available on our website is our Code of Conduct, our Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Professionals, our California Compliance Program Declaration and the charters for our Audit Committee, Compensation Committee, Nominating and Governance Committee and Science and Technology Committee. Within the time period required by the SEC and Nasdaq, we will post any amendment to our Code of Ethics for our senior financial professionals and any waiver of our Code of Conduct applicable to our senior financial professionals, executive officers and directors. 12 Table of Contents Item 1A. RISK FACTORS An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should consider each of the risks and uncertainties described in this section and all of the other information in this document before deciding to invest in our common stock. Any of the risk factors we describe below could severely harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. The market price of our common stock could decline if any of these risks or uncertainties develops into actual events. You may lose all or part of the m1y you pay to buy our common stock. We depend heavily upon sources of human tissue, and any failure to obtain tissue from these sources in a timely manner will interfere with our ability to process and distribute allografts. The supply of human tissue has at times limited our growth, and may not be sufficient to meet our future needs. In addition, due to seasonal changes in mortality rates, some scarce tissues that we currently use for allografts are at times in particularly short supply. Other factors, some of which are unpredictable, such as negative publicity and regulatory actions in the industry in which we operate (and which may not involve us) also could unexpectedly reduce the available supply of tissue. We rely on donor recovery groups for their human tissue supplies and we have relationships with tissue donor recovery agencies across the country. We also have relationships outside the United States. Donor recovery groups are part of relatively complex relationships. They provide support to donor families, are regulated by the FDA, and are often affiliated with hospitals, universities or organ procurement organizations. Our relationships with donor recovery groups, which are critical to our supply of tissue, could be affected by relationships recovery groups have with other organizations. Any negative impact arising from potential regulatory and disease transmission issues facing the industry, as well as the negative publicity that these issues could create, could adversely affect our ability to negotiate contracts with recovery groups. We cannot be sure that the supply of human tissue will continue to be available at current levels or will be sufficient to meet our needs. If we are not able to obtain tissue from current sources sufficient to meet our needs, we may not be able to locate additional replacement sources of tissue on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Any interruption of our business caused by the need to locate additional sources of tissue would significantly impact our revenues. We expect that our revenues from allografts would decline in proportion to any decline in tissue supply. If we fail to maintain existing strategic relationships or are unable to identify distributors of our implants, revenues may decrease. We currently derive a significant amount of our revenues through distributors such as Zimmer, Medtronic, Davol and Synthes. In addition, our spine distributors provide nearly all of the instrumentation, surgeon training, distribution assistance and marketing materials for the lines of spinal allografts they distribute. Variations in the timing and volume of orders by our distributors, particularly those who distribute a significant amount of our implants, may have a material effect upon our revenues. If our relationships with distributors are terminated or reduced for any reason and we are unable to replace these relationships with other means of distribution, we would suffer a material decrease in revenues. We may need, or decide it is otherwise advantageous to us, to obtain the assistance of additional distributors to market and distribute our new allografts and technologies, as well as to market and distribute our existing allografts and technologies, to new markets or geographical areas. We may not be able to find additional distributors who will agree to and successfully market and distribute our allografts and technologies on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to establish additional distribution relationships on favorable terms, our revenues may decline. 13 Table of Contents Also, our financial results are dependent upon the sales and marketing efforts of our distributors. If our distributors are unsuccessful in adequately promoting, marketing and selling our products, our sales could significantly decrease. If third party payors fail to provide appropriate levels of reimbursement for the use of our implants, revenues could be adversely affected. The impact of United States healthcare reform legislation on our business remains uncertain. In 2010 federal legislation to reform the United States healthcare system was enacted into law. The legislation is far reaching and is intended to expand access to health insurance coverage, improve the quality and reduce the costs of healthcare over time. Its provisions have become effective at various dates, and will continue to do so, and there are many programs and requirements for which the details have not been determined. We expect the law will have a significant impact upon various aspects of our business operations. Among other things, the law imposes a 23 percent excise tax on Class I, II and III medical devices that applies to United States sales of a majority of our metal and synthetic medical device products. Other provisions of this legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at improving quality and decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, could meaningfully change the way healthcare is designed and delivered. Further, we cannot predict what other healthcare programs and regulations will be ultimately implemented at the federal or state level or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the United States. However, any change that lowers reimbursements for our implants or reduces medical procedure volumes could adversely affect our business and results of operations. If we fail to maintain the high processing standards that implants require or if we are unable to develop processing capacity as required, our commercial opportunity will be reduced or eliminated. Implants require careful calibration and precise, high quality processing. Achieving precision and quality control requires skill and diligence by our personnel. If we fail to achieve and maintain these high processing standards, including avoiding processing errors, and, depending on the nature of the complaint, design defects or comp1nt failures; we could be forced to recall, withdraw or suspend distribution of our implants; our implants and technologies could fail quality assurance and performance tests; production and deliveries of our implants could be delayed or cancelled and our processing costs could increase. Further, to be successful, we will need to manage our human tissue processing capacity related to tissue recovery and demand for our allografts. It may be difficult for us to match our processing capacity to demand due to problems related to the amount of suitable tissue, quality control and assurance, tissue availability, adequacy of control policies and procedures and lack of skilled personnel. If we are unable to process and produce our implants on a timely basis, at acceptable quality and costs, and in sufficient quantities, or if we experience unanticipated technological problems or delays in processing, it may reduce revenues and increase our cost per allograft processed or both. We operate in a highly regulated industry. An inability to meet current or future regulatory requirements in the U.S. or foreign jurisdictions, or any deficiencies with our manufacturing or quality systems and processes identified by regulatory agencies, could disrupt our business, subject us to regulatory action and costly litigation, damage our reputation for high quality production, cause a loss of confidence in the company and our implants and negatively impact our financial position and operating results. The FDA and several states have statutory authority to regulate allograft processing, including our BioCleanse and TUTOPLAST processes, and allograft based materials. We must register our facilities, whether located in the United States or elsewhere, with the FDA as well as regulators outside the U.S., and our implants must be made in a manner consistent with cGTP or similar standards in each jurisdiction in which we manufacture. In addition, the FDA and other agencies perform periodic audits to ensure that our facilities remain in compliance with all appropriate regulations, including primarily the quality system regulations and medical 14 Table of Contents device reporting regulations. Following an inspection, an agency may issue a notice listing conditions that are believed to violate cGTP or other regulations (such as a FDA report on Form 483, Notice of Observations), or a warning letter for violations of regulatory significance that may result in enforcement action if not promptly and adequately corrected. For example, in June and July 2012, the FDA performed a cGTP inspection of our processing facility in Alachua, Florida to audit our compliance with cGTP requirements. The inspection was not related to a specific implant. At the conclusion of the audit, the FDA inspectors issued a Form FD483, primarily related to environmental monitoring activities in certain areas of our Alachua facility. We provided timely and detailed responses to the FD483, including commitments and timelines for the remediation of the conditions cited by the FDA. In October 2012, we received a warning letter related to some of the FD483 inspectional findings in which the FDA raised certain remaining questions and concerns. We responded to the issues cited in the warning letter and submitted information to the FDA to address its concerns. In October 2013, we received a final close out letter from the FDA to formally resolve their concerns. The warning letter did not restrict our ability to process or distribute implants, nor did it require the withdrawal of any implants from the marketplace. However, the FDA could identify other deficiencies in future inspections of our facilities or those of our suppliers. Since 2009, the FDA has significantly increased its oversight of companies subject to its regulations, including medical device companies, by hiring new investigators and stepping up inspections of manufacturing facilities. In recent years, the FDA has also significantly increased the number of warning letters issued to companies. If the FDA were to conclude that we are not in compliance with applicable laws or regulations, or that any of our implants are ineffective or pose an unreasonable health risk, the FDA could ban such implants, detain or seize adulterated or misbranded implants, order a recall, repair, replacement, or refund of such implants, refuse to grant pending premarket approval applications or require certificates of foreign governments for exports and or require us to notify health professionals and others that the implants present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also impose operating restrictions, enjoin and restrain certain violations of applicable law pertaining to medical devices and assess civil or criminal penalties against our officers, employees or us. The FDA may also recommend prosecution to the Department of Justice. Any adverse regulatory action, depending on its magnitude, may restrict us from effectively marketing and selling our implants. Any inability to meet current or future regulatory requirements in the United States or foreign jurisdictions, or any deficiencies with our manufacturing or quality systems and processes identified by regulatory agencies could disrupt our business, subject us to regulatory action and costly litigation, damage our reputation for high quality production, cause a loss of confidence in the company and our implants and negatively impact our financial position and operating results. If any of our allografts fall under the FDA definitions of more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use, we would be required to obtain medical device approval or clearance or biologics licenses, which could require clinical testing and could result in disapproval of our license applications and restricted distribution of any of our allografts which may become subject to pre market approval. The FDA could require post market testing and surveillance to monitor the effects of such allografts, could restrict the commercial applications of these allografts, and could conduct periodic inspections of our facilities and our suppliers. Delays encountered during the FDA approval process could shorten the patent protection period during which we have the exclusive right to commercialize such technologies or could allow others to come to market before us with similar technologies. cGTP covers all stages of allograft processing, from procurement of tissue to distribution of final allografts. In addition, these regulations have a significant effect upon recovery agencies which supply us with tissue and have increased the cost of recovery activities. These increases have translated into increased costs for us, because we are expected to reimburse the recovery agencies based on their cost of recovery. In addition to the FDA, several state agencies regulate tissue banking. Regulations issued by Florida, New York, California and Maryland are particularly relevant to our business. Most states do not currently have tissue banking regulations, but it is possible that others may make allegations against us or against donor recovery groups or tissue banks, including those with which we have relationships, about non compliance with applicable 15 Table of Contents FDA regulations or other relevant statutes and regulations. Allegations like these could cause regulators or other authorities to take investigative or other action, or could cause negative publicity for our business and the industry in which we operate. Some of our implants contain tissue derived from animals, commonly referred to as xenografts. Xenograft implants are medical devices that are subject to pre market approval or clearance by the FDA. We have received FDA clearance on several xenograft implants. However, we may not receive FDA approval or clearance to market new implants as we attempt to expand the quantity of xenograft implants available for distribution. The allograft industry is subject to additional local, state, federal and international government regulations and any increased regulations of our activities could significantly increase the cost of doing business, thereby reducing profitability. Some aspects of our business are subject to additional local, state, federal or international regulation. Changes in the laws or new interpretations of existing laws could negatively affect our business, revenues or prospects, and increase the costs associated with conducting our business. In particular, the procurement and transplantation of allograft tissue is subject to federal regulation under the National Organ Transplant Act ( NOTA ), a criminal statute that prohibits the purchase and sale of human organs, including b1 and other tissue. NOTA permits the payment of reasonable fees associated with the transportation, processing, preservation, quality control and storage of human tissue. If NOTA were amended or interpreted in a way that made us unable to include some of these costs in the amounts we charge our customers, it could reduce our revenues and therefore negatively impact our business. It is possible that more restrictive interpretations or expansions of NOTA could be adopted which could require us to change 1 or more aspects of our business, at a substantial cost, in order to continue to comply with this statute. A variety of additional local, state, federal and international government laws and regulations govern our business, including those relating to the storage, handling, generation, manufacture and disposal of medical wastes from the processing of tissue and collaborations with health care professionals. If we fail to conduct our business in compliance with these laws and regulations, we could be subject to significant liabilities for which our insurance may not be adequate. Moreover, such insurance may not always be available in the future on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If our insurance proves to be inadequate to pay a damage award, we may not have sufficient funds to do so, which would harm our financial condition and liquidity. Our success depends on the continued acceptance of our surgical implants and technologies by the medical community. New allograft, xenograft, metal or synthetic implants, technologies or enhancements to our existing implants may never achieve broad market acceptance, which can be affected by numerous factors, including lack of clinical acceptance of implants and technologies; introduction of competitive treatment options which render implants and technologies too expensive or obsolete; lack of availability of third party reimbursement; and difficulty training surgeons in the use of tissue implants and technologies. Market acceptance will also depend on our ability to demonstrate that our existing and new implants and technologies are an attractive alternative to existing treatment options. Our ability to do so will depend on surgeons evaluations of the clinical safety, efficacy, ease of use, reliability and cost effectiveness of these treatment options and technologies. For example, we believe that some in the medical community have lingering concerns over the risk of disease transmission through the use of allografts. Furthermore, we believe that even if the medical community generally accepts our implants and technologies, acceptance and recommendations by influential surgeons will be important to their broad commercial success. If our implants and technologies are not broadly accepted in the marketplace, we may not remain competitive in the market. 16 Table of Contents Rapid technological changes could result in reduced demand for our implants and products. Technologies change rapidly in the industry in which we operate. For example, steady improvements have been made in synthetic human tissue substitutes which compete with our tissue implants. Unlike allografts, synthetic tissue technologies are not dependent on the availability of tissue. If 1 of our competitors successfully introduces synthetic technologies using recombinant technologies, which stimulate the growth of tissue surrounding an implant, it could result in a decline in demand for tissue implants. We may not be able to respond effectively to technological changes and emerging industry standards, or to successfully identify, develop or support new technologies or enhancements to existing implants in a timely and cost effective manner, if at all. If we are unable to achieve the improvements in our implants necessary for their successful commercialization, the demand for our implants will suffer. We face intense competition, which could result in reduced acceptance and demand for our implants and technologies. The medical technology biotechnology industry is intensely competitive. We compete with companies in the United States and internationally that engage in the development and production of medical technologies and processes including biotechnology, orthopedic, pharmaceutical, biomaterial and other companies; academic and scientific institutions; and public and private research organizations. Many of our competitors have much greater financial, technical, research, marketing, distribution, service and other resources than ours. Moreover, our competitors may offer a broader array of tissue repair treatment products and technologies or may have greater name recognition in the marketplace. For example, we compete with a number of divisions of Johnson & Johnson, a company with significantly greater resources and brand recognition than ours. Our competitors, including several development stage companies, may develop or market technologies that are more effective or commercially attractive than our technologies, or that may render our technologies obsolete. For example, the development of a synthetic tissue implant that permits remodeling of b1s could reduce the demand for allograft and xenograft based implants and technologies. If we do not manage the medical release of donor tissue into processing in an effective and efficient manner, it could adversely affect profitability. Many factors affect the level and timing of donor medical releases, including the effectiveness of donor screening performed by donor recovery groups, the timely receipt, recording and review of required medical documentation, and employee loss and turnover in our medical records department. We can provide no assurance that releases will occur at levels which maximize our processing efficiency and minimize our cost per allograft processed. Negative publicity concerning methods of human tissue recovery and screening of donor tissue in the industry in which we operate may reduce demand for our allografts and impact the supply of available donor tissue. Media reports or other negative publicity concerning both methods of tissue recovery from donors and actual or potential disease transmission from donated tissue may limit widespread acceptance of our allografts, whether directed to allografts generally or our allografts specifically. Unfavorable reports of improper or illegal tissue recovery practices by any participant in the industry, both in the United States and internationally, as well as incidents of improperly processed tissue leading to transmission of disease, may broadly affect the rate of future tissue donation and market acceptance of allograft technologies. Potential patients may not be able to distinguish our allografts, technologies and the tissue recovery and the processing procedures from those of our competitors or others engaged in tissue recovery. In addition, families of potential donors may become reluctant to agree to donate tissue to for profit tissue processors. 17 Table of Contents If our patents and the other means we use to protect our intellectual property prove to be inadequate, our competitors could exploit our intellectual property to compete more effectively against us. The law of patents and trade secrets is constantly evolving and often involves complex legal and factual questions. The U.S. government may deny or significantly reduce the coverage we seek for our patent applications before or after a patent is issued. We cannot be sure that any particular patent for which we apply will be issued, that the scope of the patent protection will be comprehensive enough to provide adequate protection from competing technologies, that interference, derivation, reexamination, post grant review or inter parties review proceedings regarding any of our patent applications will not be filed, or that we will achieve any other competitive advantage from a patent. In addition, it is possible that 1 or more of our patents will be held invalid or reduced in scope of claims if challenged or that others will claim rights in or ownership of our patents and other proprietary rights. If any of these events occur, our competitors may be able to use our intellectual property to compete more effectively against us. Because patent applications remain secret until published (typically 18 months after first filing) and the publication of discoveries in the scientific or patent literature often lag behind actual discoveries, we cannot be certain that our patent application was the first application filed disclosing or potentially covering a particular invention. If another party rights to an invention are superior to ours, we may not be able to obtain a license to use that party invention on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. In addition, our competitors, many of which have greater resources than ours, could obtain patents that will prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make use of our inventions either in the United States or in international markets. Further, the laws of some foreign countries do not always protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Litigation or regulatory proceedings in the United States or foreign countries also may be necessary to enforce our patent or other intellectual property rights or to determine the scope and validity of the proprietary rights of our competitors. These proceedings can be costly, result in development delays, and divert the attention of our management. We rely upon unpatented proprietary techniques and processes in tissue recovery, research and development, tissue processing, manufacturing and quality assurance. It is possible that others will independently develop technology similar to our technology or otherwise gain access to or disclose our proprietary technologies. We may not be able to meaningfully protect our rights in these proprietary technologies, which would reduce our ability to compete. Our success depends in part on our ability to operate without infringing on or misappropriating the proprietary rights of others, and if we are unable to do so we may be liable for damages. We cannot be certain that U.S. or foreign patents or patent applications of other companies do not exist or will not be issued that would prevent us from commercializing our allografts, xenografts, surgical implants and other technologies. Third parties may sue us for infringing or misappropriating their patent or other intellectual property rights. Intellectual property litigation is costly. If we do not prevail in litigation, in addition to any damages we might have to pay, we could be required to cease the infringing activity or obtain a license requiring us to make royalty payments. It is possible that a required license may not be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. In addition, a required license may be non exclusive, and therefore our competitors may have access to the same technology licensed to us. If we fail to obtain a required license or are unable to design around another company patent, we may be unable to make use of some of the affected technologies or distribute the affected allografts, xenografts or surgical implants, which would reduce our revenues. The defense costs and settlements for patent infringement lawsuits are not covered by insurance. Patent infringement lawsuits can take years to settle. If we are not successful in our defenses or are not successful in obtaining dismissals of any such lawsuit, legal fees or settlement costs could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial position. 18 Table of Contents We or our competitors may be exposed to product or professional liability claims which could cause us to be liable for damages or cause investors to think we will be liable for similar claims in the future. The development of allografts and technologies for human tissue repair and treatment entails an inherent risk of product or professional liability claims, and substantial product or professional liability claims may be asserted against us. We are party to a number of legal proceedings relating to professional liability. The prevailing view among the states throughout the United States is that providing allografts is a service and not the sale of a product. As such, allografts are not subject to product liability causes of action. However, the law of a particular state could change in response to legislative changes or by judicial interpretation in a state where such issue has either not been previously addressed or prior precedent is overturned or subject to different interpretations by a court of higher precedential authority. In addition, due to the international scope of our activities we are subject to international laws which may treat allografts as products in those jurisdictions. The implantation of donated human tissue implants creates the potential for transmission of communicable diseases. Although we comply with federal, state and foreign regulations and guidelines intended to prevent communicable disease transmission, and our tissue suppliers are also required to comply with such regulations, there can be no assurances that (i) our tissue suppliers will comply with such regulations intended to prevent communicable disease transmissions; (ii) even if such compliance is achieved, that our implants have not been or will not be associated with transmission of disease; or (iii) a patient otherwise infected with disease would not err1ously assert a claim that the use of our implants resulted in disease transmission. We currently have $20 million of product and professional liability insurance to cover claims. This amount of insurance may not be adequate for potential claims if we are not successful in our defenses. Moreover, insurance covering our business may not always be available in the future on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If our insurance proves to be inadequate to pay a damage award, we may not have sufficient funds to do so, which would harm our financial condition and liquidity. In addition, successful product liability claims made against 1 of our competitors could cause claims to be made against us or expose us to a perception that we are vulnerable to similar claims. Claims against us, regardless of their merit or potential outcome, may also hurt our ability to obtain surgeon acceptance of our allografts or to expand our business. We are subject to federal, state and foreign laws and regulations, including fraud and abuse laws, as well as anti bribery laws, and could face substantial penalties if we fail to fully comply with such regulations and laws. Our relationship with foreign and domestic government entities and healthcare professionals, such as physicians, hospitals and those to whom and through whom we may market our implants and technologies, are subject to scrutiny under various federal, state and territorial laws in the United States and other jurisdictions in which we conduct business. These include, for example, anti kickback laws, physician self referral laws, false claims laws, criminal health care fraud laws, and anti bribery laws (e.g., the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act). Violations of these laws are punishable by criminal and or civil sanctions, including, in some instances, fines, imprisonment and, within the United States, exclusion from participation in government healthcare programs, including Medicare, Medicaid and Veterans Administration health programs. These laws are administered by, among others, the U.S. Department of Justice, the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, state attorneys general, and their respective counterparts in the applicable foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. Many of these agencies have increased their enforcement activities with respect to medical device manufacturers in recent years. If we are not successful in expanding our distribution activities into international markets, we will not be able to pursue 1 of our strategies for increasing revenues. Our international distribution strategies vary by market, as well as within each country in which we operate. For example, we distribute only a portion of our line of allograft and xenograft implants within each country. Our 19 Table of Contents international operations will be subject to a number of risks which may vary from the risks we face in the United States, including the need to obtain regulatory approvals in additional foreign countries before we can offer our implants and technologies for use; the potential burdens of complying with different foreign laws; longer distribution to collection cycles, as well as difficulty in collecting accounts receivable; dependence on local distributors; limited protection of intellectual property rights; fluctuations in the values of foreign currencies; and political and economic instability. The outcome of litigation or arbitration in which we are involved is unpredictable and an adverse decision in any such matter could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. We are from time to time subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. For example, we were named as a party, along with a number of other recovery and processor defendants, in lawsuits relating to the tissue recovery practices of Biomedical Tissue Service, Ltd. ( BTS ), an unaffiliated recovery agency. We settled the BTS cases in 2012 and 2013 for payments of $24 million and $30 million. Accordingly, we recorded a litigation settlement charge of $3 million in the second quarter of 2013 In addition, Lanx, Inc., a subsidiary of Biomet, Inc. ( Lanx ), filed suit in the second quarter of 2013 against Pi1er in the U.S. District Court, District of Colorado, alleging that 1 of our medical devices infringed certain of Lanx U.S. intellectual property rights, and sought m1tary damages and threatened injunctive relief. In the second quarter of 2014, the parties resolved the claim with no material financial impact to us or our operations. As part of the resolution of the claim, a settlement payment of $325,000 was made to Lanx from the indemnification escrow account. An adverse resolution of lawsuits or arbitrations could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. Any acquisitions we make may require the issuance of a significant amount of equity or debt securities and may not be scientifically or commercially successful. As part of our business strategy, we may make certain acquisitions to obtain additional businesses, product and or process technologies, capabilities and personnel. If we make 1 or more significant acquisitions in which the consideration includes securities, we may be required to issue a substantial amount of equity, debt, warrants, convertible instruments or other similar securities. Such an issuance could dilute your investment in our common stock or increase our interest expense and other expenses. Further, acquisitions involve a number of operational risks, such as difficulty and expense of assimilating the operations, technology and personnel of the acquired business; our inability to retain the management, key personnel and other employees of the acquired business; our inability to maintain the acquired company relationship with customers and key third parties, such as alliance partners; exposure to legal claims for activities of the acquired business prior to the acquisition; the potential need to implement financial and other systems and add management resources; the potential for internal control deficiencies in the internal controls of the acquired operations; potential inexperience in a business area that is either new to us or more significant to us than prior to the acquisition; the diversion of our management attention from our core business; and the potential impairment of goodwill and write off of in process research and development costs, adversely affecting our reported results of operations. 20 Table of Contents Any 1 of these risks could prevent an acquisition from being scientifically or commercially successful, which could have a material impact on our results of operations not only with respect to the operations of the acquired company but with respect to us on a consolidated basis. Water Street may exercise significant influence over us, including through its ability to elect up to 2 members of our Board of Directors. Holders of the Series A convertible preferred stock ( Preferred Stock ) are entitled to vote on an as converted basis upon all matters upon which holders of our common stock have the right to vote. The shares of Preferred Stock owned by Water Street currently represent approximately 18% of the voting rights in respect of our share capital on an as converted basis; accordingly, Water Street has the ability to significantly influence the outcome of any matter submitted for the vote of our stockholders. In addition, to the extent dividends are not paid in cash in any quarter for any reason, including any restriction on making such distributions under the terms of our credit agreement with TD Bank (as discussed below), the dividends which have accrued on each outstanding share of Preferred Stock during such 3 month period shall be accumulated and shall be added to the liquidation value with respect to such share of Preferred Stock. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2013 and throughout 2014, we did not pay dividends on the Preferred Stock, consequently we have accrued $39 million in preferred dividends payable as of December 31, 2014. To the extent dividends continue to accrue on the Preferred Stock, Water Street voting rights in respect of our share capital on an as converted basis will continue to increase. Water Street may have interests that diverge from, or even conflict with, those of our other stockholders. In addition, our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Investor Rights Agreement with Water Street provide that Water Street consent is required before we may take certain actions for so long as Water Street and its permitted transferees beneficially own in the aggregate at least 10% of our issued share capital. In addition, our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and our Investor Rights Agreement with Water Street provide that Water Street has the right to designate and nominate, respectively, directors to our Board of Directors such that the percentage of our board members so designated or nominate is approximately equal to Water Street percentage equity ownership interest in the company. The maximum number of directors that Water Street is able to designate or nominate is 2, with at least 1 of such directors to serve on each of our Board committees. If Water Street ownership of our share capital on an as converted basis falls below 5% (calculated on a fully diluted basis, assuming conversion of the Preferred Stock at the then existing conversion price), Water Street would have no further director designation or nomination rights under our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation or the investor rights agreement. In addition, the ownership position and the governance rights of Water Street could discourage a third party from proposing a change of control or other strategic transaction with us. Our level of indebtedness that we incurred in connection with the acquisition of Pi1er could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital to fund our operations, limit our ability to react to changes in the economy or our industry and prevent us from meeting our obligations under the agreements relating to our indebtedness. In connection with the closing of the acquisition, we obtained from our lenders a 5 year, $80 million senior secured facility, which includes a $60 million term loan and a $20 million revolving credit facility. Additionally, we issued Preferred Stock to Water Street for $50 million in gross proceeds. The Preferred Stock accrues dividends at a rate of 6% per annum. Dividends are payable in cash on a quarterly basis for each outstanding share of Preferred Stock. To the extent dividends are not paid in cash in any quarter, the dividends which have accrued on each outstanding share of Preferred Stock during such 3 month period shall be accumulated and shall be added to the liquidation value with respect to such share of Preferred Stock. In the fourth quarter of 2013 21 Table of Contents and throughout 2014, we did not pay dividends on the Preferred Stock, consequently we have accrued $39 million in preferred dividends payable as of December 31, 2014, which has been added to the liquidation value with respect to the Preferred Stock. Our ability to pay dividends and to make distributions may be limited or prohibited by the terms of our indebtedness or Preferred Stock. We are, and may in the future become, party to agreements and instruments that restrict or prevent the payment of dividends on our capital stock. Under the terms of our credit agreement with TD Bank, we are restricted from paying dividends on our common stock without the prior written consent of the administrative agent. We are also restricted from paying dividends or making distributions on our common stock without the prior written consent of the holders of a majority of the Preferred Stock pursuant to the terms of the Certificate of Designation of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, so long as any shares of the Preferred Stock remain outstanding. In addition, under the terms of our credit agreement with TD Bank, distributions to holders of our Preferred Stock are permitted only to the extent that we can satisfy certain financial covenant tests (based on the ratio of our total indebtedness to consolidated EBITDA) and meet other requirements. In the event that we fail to pay the accrued dividends payable on our Preferred Stock for any reason, including any restriction on making such distributions under the terms of our credit agreement with TD Bank, dividends payable will continue to accrue on such Preferred Stock. Our credit agreement contains financial and operating restrictions that may limit our access to credit. If we fail to comply with financial or other covenants in our credit agreement, we may be required to repay indebtedness to our existing lenders, which may harm our liquidity. Provisions in our credit agreement impose restrictions on our ability to, among other things merge or consolidate; make strategic acquisitions; make dispositions of property; create liens; enter into transactions with affiliates; become a guarantor; pay dividends and make distributions (as described above); incur more debt; and make investments. Our credit agreement also contains financial covenants that require us to maintain compliance with specified financial ratios and maintain a specified amount of cash on hand. We may not be able to comply with the financial covenants in the future. In the absence of a waiver from our lenders, any failure by us to comply with these covenants in the future may result in the declaration of an event of default, which could prevent us from borrowing under our credit agreement. In addition to preventing additional borrowings under our credit agreement, an event of default, if not cured or waived, may result in the acceleration of the maturity of indebtedness outstanding, if any, under the agreement, which would require us to pay all amounts outstanding. If an event of default occurs, we may not be able to cure it within any applicable cure period, if at all. If the maturity of our indebtedness is accelerated, we then may not have sufficient funds available for repayment or the ability to borrow or obtain sufficient funds to replace the accelerated indebtedness on terms acceptable to us, or at all. For example, in December 2013, we entered into an amendment to the credit 22 Table of Contents agreement which, in part, modified certain financial covenants so that we could maintain compliance with the financial ratios. In October 2014, we entered into a second amendment to the second amended and restated loan agreement with TD Bank, N.A. and Regions Bank, which amended the loan agreement to remove certain financial covenants. Item 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 Item 2 Item 2 PROPERTIES. 
