CIK: 1100441
Company Name: RTI BIOLOGICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-02-26
Accession Number: 0001193125-13-076915


Item 1 BUSINESS. Company Overview We are a leader in the use of natural tissues and innovative technologies to produce orthopedic and other surgical implants that repair and promote the natural healing of human b1 and other human tissues and improve surgical outcomes. We recover and process donated human musculoskeletal and other tissue, including b1, cartilage, tendon, ligament, fascia lata, pericardium, sclera and dermal tissue, and bovine animal tissue in producing allograft and xenograft implants utilizing proprietary BIOCLEANSE , TUTOPLAST and CANCELLE SP sterilization processes, for distribution to hospitals and surgeons. We process at 2 facilities in Alachua, Florida and 1 facility in Neunkirchen, Germany and distribute our products and services in all 50 states and in over 30 countries worldwide. We process human and bovine animal tissue and distribute the tissue through various distribution channels. Our lines of business are comprised primarily of five categories sports medicine, spine, surgical specialties, b1 graft substitutes and general orthopedic ( BGS and general orthopedic ) and dental. The following table presents revenues from tissue distribution and other revenues and their respective percentages of our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 Year Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 (In thousands) Revenues from tissue distribution Sports medicine $ 51,197 28.8 % $ 48,122 28.4 % $ 45,065 27.1 % Spine 38,866 218 % 39,722 235 % 33,906 20.4 % Surgical specialties 30,897 17.3 % 30,328 17.9 % 26,871 16.2 % BGS and general orthopedic 29,308 16.5 % 26,291 15.5 % 25,413 15.3 % Dental 21,435 120 % 18,392 10.9 % 29,746 17.9 % Other revenues 6,410 36 % 6,461 38 % 5,170 31 % Total revenues $ 178,113 100.0 % $ 169,316 100.0 % $ 166,171 100.0 % Domestic revenues $ 156,803 88.0 % $ 148,315 87.6 % $ 147,943 89.0 % International revenues 21,310 120 % 21,001 124 % 18,228 110 % Total revenues $ 178,113 100.0 % $ 169,316 100.0 % $ 166,171 100.0 % For additional financial information concerning our operating performance, please refer to Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in I, Item 7 of this report and our Consolidated Financial Statements in I, Item 8 of this report. 1 We pursue a market by market approach to the distribution of our implants, and establish strategic distribution arrangements in order to increase our penetration in selected markets. In the domestic sports medicine and BGS and general orthopedic applications, we have developed a direct distribution organization and a ne2rk of independent distributors. We have distribution arrangements with Integra Life Sciences Corporation. ( Integra ), along with Wright Medical Technology, Inc. ( Wright ) who distributes certain of our sports medicine implants. For our spine implants we distribute through and or process for Alphatec Spine, Inc. ( Alphatec ), SeaSpine, Inc. ( SeaSpine ), a subsidiary of Integra LifeSciences Corporation ( Integra ), Stryker Spine, a division of Stryker Corporation ( Stryker ), Aesculap Implant Systems, Inc. ( Aesculap ), Orthofix International NV ( Orthofix ), Medtronic, Inc. ( Medtronic ), Zimmer, Inc. ( Zimmer ) and Integra. For our surgical specialties markets, we distribute through Integra for our bovine pericardium and dural repair applications, through ENTrigue Surgical, Inc. ( ENTrigue ) for ear, nose and throat applications, through Coloplast A S of Denmark ( Coloplast ) for urology, through Davol, Inc., a subsidiary of C. R. Bard, Inc. ( Davol ) for hernia repair and breast reconstruction and through IOP, Inc. ( IOP ) for ophthalmology. For our BGS and general orthopedic implants, we distribute through Medtronic, Zimmer, Exactech, Inc., ( Exactech ), Pi1er Surgical Technology, Inc. ( Pi1er ), Stryker, Integra and Wright Medical. For our domestic dental implants we distribute exclusively through Zimmer subject to certain Company obligations under an existing distribution agreement with a third party. In the international market we have a direct distribution force in Germany and a ne2rk of independent distributors outside Germany for other implants and Zimmer for our dental implants. As part of the tissue procurement process we rely on tissue recovery agencies to obtain appropriate consent and perform federally mandated donor screening, such as a medical and social history interview with an authorized person. Upon receipt of the tissue, we conduct pre processing donor screening to determine its medical suitability for transplantation, including reviewing available medical records and testing of blood collected from each donor by the recovery agency for the presence of viral or bacterial diseases. We also screen tissue at various points during processing, including, for example, mechanical tests. For processing, b1 tissue, soft tissue, tendon and ligament grafts are sterilized through our BioCleanse process, TUTOPLAST process, or CANCELLE SP process only after they have passed prior tissue screening steps. Our BioCleanse process is a patented tissue sterilization process that is designed to add a measure of safety to our tissue implants and provide surgeons and patients with tissue implants that are free of spores, fungi, bacteria and viruses and is the only tissue sterilization process that has been reviewed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ). The BioCleanse process is an automated, multi step cleansing process which first removes blood and fats, then chemically sterilizes the tissue, while maintaining the structural integrity and biocompatibility of the tissue, and is applied to b1 tissue and tendon and ligament tissue. The TUTOPLAST process utilizes solvent dehydration and chemical inactivation, and is applied to 2 types of preserved allografts soft tissue, consisting of fascia lata, fascia temporalis, pericardium, dermis and sclera; and b1 tissue; consisting of various configurations of cancellous and cortical b1 material. The CANCELLE SP process sterilizes DBM pastes and putties while simultaneously allowing them to maintain their osteoinductive potential (as determined by lot release animal studies or testing for certain protein markers these tests are not necessarily predictive of human clinical results). Through a combination of oxidative treatments and acid or alcohol washes, debris is removed and pathogens are inactivated. Cleansing rinses remove residual chemicals, maintaining biocompatibility and preserving the utility of the graft. The CANCELLE SP irradiation dose is delivered terminally for pastes and putties to achieve device level sterility (SAL 10 6). We believe that the BioCleanse , TUTOPLAST , and CANCELLE SP processes are the industry leading sterilization processes. We are an accredited member of the American Association of Tissue Banks, or AATB, a nationally recognized association of the tissue banking industry. The accreditation covers the processing, storage and distribution of tissues for transplantation and research and informs users of our human tissue implants that we are in compliance with the minimum safety guidelines of the association. Corporate Information We were incorporated in 1997 in Florida as a wholly owned subsidiary of the University of Florida Tissue Bank, UFTB . We began operations on February 12, 1998 when UFTB contributed to us its allograft processing operations, related equipment and technologies, distribution arrangements, research and development activities and certain other assets. At the time of our initial public offering in August 2000, we reincorporated in the State of Delaware. On February 27, 2008, we completed our merger with Tutogen Medical, Inc., a Delaware corporation ( TMI ), in a tax free stock for stock exchange pursuant to which TMI shareholders received 122 shares of our common stock for each share of TMI common stock. In connection with the merger, we changed our name from Regeneration Technologies, Inc. to RTI Biologics, Inc. The results of TMI operations have been included in our consolidated financial statements since the merger. Our principal offices are located at 11621 Research Circle, Alachua, Florida, and our ph1 number is (386) 418 8888. 2 Industry Overview Defects in b1 and other human tissue can be caused by a variety of sources including trauma, congenital defect, aging, revision of joint replacements, infectious disease, cancer and other similar conditions. The prevalent method used to repair and promote the healing of defective tissue is surgical intervention, principally through the use of surgical implants. When considering a surgical procedure for tissue repair, surgeons and patients have a number of treatment options including metals and synthetics; xenograft tissue from an animal source; autograft tissue from the patient; and allograft tissue from another human donor. Metals and Synthetics Historically, the medical community has used metal and synthetic materials for implant procedures. Metal and synthetic technologies, however, have several shortcomings. 1 of the principal drawbacks to the use of these materials is that, despite best efforts, they do not facilitate the body natural tissue healing process known as remodeling. Metal exhibits different properties than b1, and 1 concern with its use in orthopedics is stress shielding, where the b1 adjoining the metal can become weak and fragile over time. This problem can be of particular concern to elderly patients who are more likely to suffer from osteoporosis. Additionally, a number of synthetics can wear away in the body, causing a negative immune system response. Other synthetics can chemically break down over time with negative biological and clinical consequences. Using metal and synthetic products may also make it difficult to do a second surgery or revision. Finally, some metal and synthetic products may need to be removed and or replaced, requiring the risk, expense and inconvenience of a second surgery. Xenograft Tissue Surgical procedures using xenograft tissue based implants are common in many areas of medicine including cardiac and vascular procedures, soft tissue repair and wound care. Xenograft based products are also used in the repair of b1 defects in orthopedic surgery as carriers for demineralized b1 matrix and b1 morphogenic protein products. The production of xenograft products involves recovering animal tissue, typically from cattle (bovine) or pigs (porcine), processing and sterilization, and then transplanting that recovered tissue into a human patient. Autograft and Allograft Tissue Surgeons are increasingly utilizing autograft and allograft tissue in their surgical procedures to take advantage of their natural healing characteristics. Autograft procedures involve a surgeon harvesting tissue from 1 part of a patient body for transplant to another part of the body. In contrast to autograft, allograft tissues are recovered from cadaveric donors, processed for certain intended uses and then transplanted by a surgeon into the patient body to make the needed repair. Autografts and allografts are not only osteoconductive, meaning they provide a scaffold for new b1 to attach itself to, but, in contrast to metals and some synthetics, can be osteoinductive as well, meaning they stimulate the growth of new tissue. A significant drawback to autograft procedures is that they require an additional surgery to harvest the tissue from a second site in the patient body. Often in autograft procedures, the site where the patient tissue is harvested becomes painful and uncomfortable, and can take longer to heal than the primary surgical site. Additional complications can involve infection, nerve and arterial injury and joint instability. Moreover, a patient may not have sufficient quantities of quality autograft tissue for transplant procedures. We believe allograft is a superior surgical solution compared to autograft because the procedure involves only the primary surgical site. Marketing and Distribution Our lines of business are comprised primarily of the following markets sports medicine, spine, surgical specialties, BGS and general orthopedic and dental. Our current implants range from allografts and xenografts that are precision machined for specific surgical applications to grafts conventionally processed for general surgical uses. Sports Medicine Many repetitive use and sports related injuries can be addressed with allograft implants. The most prevalent surgeries include repairs to the anterior cruciate ligament, or ACL in the knee, and rotator cuff, in the shoulder. Our principal sports medicine allografts are tendons for ligament reconstruction and our meniscal allografts for transplantation. Many of our sports 3 medicine allografts utilize our patented pre shape technology and are shaped to fit surgeon requirements making them easier and or faster to implant. Our sports medicine implants such as our BioCleanse Meniscus, B1 Tendon B1 Select, BioCleanse Per1us Longus, fresh stored osteochondral (OC) allograft for cartilage repair, Matrix HD dermis products for wound repair and our Fresh OC Talus are marketed domestically through our direct biologics representatives and through our ne2rk of independent distributors and internationally through a ne2rk of independent distributors. On July 1, 2011, we entered into a Distribution and Supply Agreement with Integra for an initial term of 5 years measured from the date on which Integra receives and accepts the first commercially distributable order of implants we agreed to process and package based on Integra designs for distribution by Integra. The current agreement with Integra expires July 24, 2016 and will renew automatically for an additional 5 years unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 180 days notice in advance of the renewal date, and thereafter for up to 2 successive 2 year terms. The contract is expected to be renewed. Spine The spine market for allografts includes precision machined implants and b1 paste utilized in spinal procedures. Our spine allografts are marketed domestically through our non exclusive relationships with Alphatec, SeaSpine, Aesculap, Stryker, Orthofix, Medtronic, and Zimmer. On February 11, 2011, we entered into a Distribution and Supply Agreement with Alphatec with an initial term of 3 years, under which we agreed to process and package implants designed by Alphatec for distribution by Alphatec. The current agreement with Alphatec expires February 10, 2014 and will renew automatically for successive 3 year terms. On July 29, 2010, we entered into a Contract Processing and Supply Agreement with an initial term of 3 years with SeaSpine, under which we agreed to process and package implants designed by SeaSpine for distribution by SeaSpine. The current agreement with SeaSpine expires July 28, 2013 The contract term is expected to be extended or a new contract executed. On December 15, 2008, we entered into an Implant Development and Supply Agreement with Aesculap with an initial term of 10 years, under which we agreed to process and package implants designed by Aesculap for distribution by Aesculap. On June 6, 2007, we entered into an Allograft Distribution and Supply Agreement with Stryker with an initial term of 3 years under which we process and package implants designed by Stryker for distribution by Stryker. The current agreement with Stryker expires June 5, 2013 and will continue to renew automatically for successive 1 year terms, unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 60 days notice in advance of the renewal date. The contract is expected to be renewed. On November 21, 2006, we entered into an Allograft Distribution and Supply Agreement with Orthofix with an initial term of 3 years. Under this agreement, we process and package implants designed by Orthofix for distribution by Orthofix. On November 17, 2007, this agreement was expanded to include four additional implant designs. The current agreement with Orthofix expires November 21, 2013 and will continue to renew automatically for successive 1 year terms, unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 60 days notice in advance of the renewal date. The contract is expected to be renewed. Medtronic is our principal distributor in the spine market. We originally entered into an Exclusive Distribution and License Agreement with Medtronic, dated June 1, 2002, pursuant to which Medtronic distributed specialty allograft and b1 paste for use in spinal surgery. We have amended our agreement with Medtronic several times since 2002 Our current agreement with Medtronic will expire on June 1, 2014, unless the parties agree to extend the agreement. During September 2000, Zimmer began distributing TMI b1 implants under a ten year agreement for applications in the spine market. In April 2003, TMI entered into an Exclusive License and Distribution Agreement with Zimmer with an initial term of 10 years. Effective with that agreement, Zimmer became a stocking distributor . The agreement was amended in July 2005. Currently, Zimmer distributes both traditional b1 and specialty allografts, and b1 paste for use in spinal surgery. Our current spine agreement with Zimmer expires March 8, 2014 and will continue to renew automatically for successive 1 year terms unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 12 months notice in advance of the renewal date. The contract is expected to be renewed. Surgical Specialties We distribute implants for surgical specialties which include hernia, breast reconstruction, urology, and ophthalmology. 4 On April 11, 2011, we entered into a Distribution and Supply Agreement with Integra for an initial term of 5 years measured from the date on which Integra receives and accepts the first commercially distributable order of processed and packaged bovine pericardium for dural repair applications for distribution by Integra. We do not have regulatory clearance for this product. The product will be made available to Integra once regulatory clearance has been completed. As such, the initial 5 year term has not effectively begun. Following the initial 5 year term, the agreement will automatically renew for an additional 3 years unless Integra elects to terminate, and subsequently for up to 2 additional renewal terms of 2 years each terminable by either party. On June 12, 2012, the Distribution and Supply Agreement was amended. Integra may immediately terminate the agreement upon written notice to the Company in the event we fail to obtain regulatory clearance for the implants by April 10, 2014, or if we fail to provide Integra with commercially salable implants within 4 months after we obtain regulatory clearance for the implants. In December 2008, we entered into a biologics development, distribution and supply agreement with ENTrigue to develop, promote, distribute and supply our line of allograft biologic tissues for the ear, nose and throat market. This agreement has an initial term of six years with automatic 3 year renewals unless terminated in writing by either party. Initial shipments of implants to ENTrigue began in 2009. The parties mutually agreed to terminate the agreement effective January 1, 2013 with no negative consequences. In May 2007, TMI signed an agreement with Coloplast extending its then current distribution agreement in the urology market and expanding its scope both internationally, and to include TMI Tutoplast processed bovine pericardium. As a stocking distributor, Coloplast markets TUTOPLAST fascia lata, dermis, and pericardium tissue grafts. This agreement was renewed for a period of 3 years effective December 1, 2011 In January 2006, TMI entered into a four year exclusive worldwide distribution agreement with Davol to promote, market and distribute TMI line of allograft biologic tissues for hernia repair and the reconstruction of the chest and abdominal walls. Under the agreement, Davol paid TMI $33 million in fees for the exclusive distribution rights. On July 13, 2009, we and Davol amended the January 2006 distribution agreement with TMI. Under the amended agreement, 1) Davol paid us $8.0 million in non refundable fees for exclusive distribution rights for the distribution to the breast reconstruction market until July 13, 2019, 2) the exclusive worldwide distribution agreement related to the hernia market was extended to July 13, 2019, and 3) Davol agreed to pay us certain additional exclusive distribution rights fees contingent upon the achievement of certain revenue milest1s by Davol during the duration of the contract. In the fourth quarter of 2010, Davol paid us the first revenue milest1 payment of $35 million. Davol did not achieve certain revenue growth milest1s which resulted in Davol relinquishing its exclusive distribution rights in the hernia market effective January 1, 2013 The $8.0 million and $35 million exclusivity payments have been deferred and are being recognized as other revenue on a straight line basis over the initial term of the amended contract of ten years, and the remaining term of the amended contract, respectively. The straight line method approximates the expected pattern of product distribution based on the distribution agreement annual minimum purchase requirements. IOP was a distributor of TMI since 1998, and continues to be an exclusive distributor for our TUTOPLAST processed tissue for ophthalmic applications. Our current distribution agreement with IOP expires on December 15, 2015 and renews automatically for 3 consecutive 1 year terms unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 9 months notice in advance of the renewal date. BGS and general orthopedic Allograft Paste. Surgeons principally use our allograft paste implants, which are composed of demineralized b1 matrix ( DBM ) and in some cases a biologic gel carrier, in fracture treatment, b1 and joint reconstruction and periodontal applications, such as ridge augmentation for dental implants. Our allograft paste implants are marketed under Osteofil by Medtronic, Puros DBM by Zimmer and the Optefil , Opteform , Regenafil and Regenaform brands with Exactech and we distribute directly the BioSet , BioReady and BioAdapt families of paste implants through our direct distributor force, Pi1er, and our international distribution ne2rk. Our DBM Boat implants are marketed under BIO DBM by Stryker. On July 1, 2011, we entered into a Distribution and Supply Agreement with an initial term of 5 years with Integra, under which we agreed to process and package allograft wedge implants for distribution by Integra for use in foot and ankle applications. On May 29, 2009, we entered into a Distribution and Supply Agreement with an initial term of 3 years and 2 year automatic renewals with Stryker, under which we distribute through Stryker certain shaped allograft implants based on a proprietary technology platform of the Company. The current agreement with Stryker expires May 28, 2014. 5 On May 14, 2007, we entered into an exclusive distribution agreement with Zimmer with an initial term of 10 years, relating to certain new b1 graft substitutes implants. As part of the agreement, Zimmer made payments to us totaling $5.0 million for the aforementi1d exclusive distribution rights, and had to maintain certain minimum order volumes through the duration of the contract. The $5.0 million exclusivity payment has been deferred and is being recognized in other revenues on a straight line basis over the initial term of the contract. The contract provides for repayment, on a pro rata basis, of the exclusivity payments during the initial contract term for specific events of non performance, as defined in the agreement. The agreement also included automatic 2 year renewal terms, as well as buy out provisions by both parties upon proper notice of cancellation. Effective May 30, 2012, the agreement with Zimmer was amended so that Zimmer retained exclusivity for dental and oral maxillofacial applications, and released exclusivity for other applications. Under the amended agreement, Zimmer is no longer required to maintain minimum order volumes, we are restricted from distributing the b1 graft substitute implants into certain Zimmer accounts, and the buy out provisions upon proper notice of cancellation were removed. No payment was made as part of the amendment and the term of the agreement remains unchanged. The exclusivity payment was not affected by the amendment to the agreement, which was not considered to be a material modification, and as such the revenue recognition methodology remains unchanged. On February 9, 2007, we entered into a Xenograft Distribution and Supply Agreement with Wright with an initial term of 10 years. Under this contract, Wright distributes certain allografts, xenografts as well as xenografts designed by Wright which we process and package. This agreement was expanded to include additional designs effective March 9, 2007. This agreement expires February 8, 2017 and renews automatically with successive 1 year terms unless terminated in writing by either party with at least 60 days notice in advance of the renewal date. Milled Allograft and Xenograft. Our b1 graft substitutes business also includes certain types of blended and milled b1 allografts and xenografts, such as our demineralized b1 matrix, cortical cancellous chips and ground cancellous chips, used in total hip and knee replacements and for various injuries. Conventional Allografts. Our conventional allograft business includes a wide variety of allograft categories including our intercalary grafts, such as our frozen femoral heads which are used for cancer treatment procedures and hip and knee reconstruction. We also produce various types of fashi1d b1, such as strips and shafts used for various orthopedic procedures. Dental We currently provide various implants including cancellous and cortical b1 and human and bovine membranes primarily for dental procedures related to augmenting ridge restoration. During September 2000, Zimmer entered into a ten year agreement to represent TUTOPLAST processed b1, under the brand name Puros , for dental applications. Zimmer marketed the implants to the end user and in the United States we shipped and billed the customer directly. Distribution fees earned pursuant to the agreement were recognized ratably over the term of the agreement. During 2006, TMI expanded its relationship with Zimmer by adding pericardium and dermis soft tissue implants for dental applications. The additions of these implants provided Zimmer with a full line of biologic implants for the dental surgeons. In August 2007, TMI entered into an agreement to extend Zimmer exclusivity internationally into Europe, the Middle East and Asia. The international agreement included both human and bovine b1 and soft tissue implants and allowed Zimmer to provide the dentist with a complete offering of implants for the regenerative procedure. On September 3, 2010, we entered into a new exclusive distribution agreement with Zimmer Dental Inc. ( Zimmer Dental ), a subsidiary of Zimmer, with an effective date of September 30, 2010. This agreement has an initial term of ten years. Under the terms of the agreement, we have agreed to supply sterilized allograft and xenograft implants at an agreed upon transfer price, and Zimmer Dental has agreed to be the exclusive distributor of these implants for dental and oral applications worldwide (except the Ukraine), subject to certain Company obligations under an existing distribution agreement with a third party with respect to certain implants for the dental market. In consideration for Zimmer Dental exclusive distribution rights, Zimmer Dental agreed to the following 1) payment to us of $130 million within ten days of the effective date , 2) annual exclusivity fees paid annually for the term of the contract to be paid at the beginning of each calendar year, and, 3) escalating annual order minimums to maintain exclusivity. Upon occurrence of an event that materially and adversely affects Zimmer Dental ability to distribute the implants, Zimmer Dental may be entitled to certain refund rights with respect to the upfront payment and the then current annual exclusivity fee, where such refund would be in an amount limited by a formula specified in the agreement that is based substantially on the number of days from the occurrence of such event to the date that it is cured by us to the satisfaction of Zimmer Dental. The upfront payment and the annual exclusivity fees are deferred as received and are being recognized in other revenues based on the expected contractual escalating annual purchase minimums relative to the total contractual minimum purchase requirements in the agreement. Additionally, we have considered the potential impact of the agreement contractual refund provisions and we do not expect these provisions to impact future expected revenue related to the agreement. 6 The BioCleanse Tissue Sterilization Solution We have developed and utilized in the United States the patented BioCleanse tissue sterilization process, which is an automated, pharmaceutical grade chemical sterilization process for musculoskeletal b1 and certain soft tissue. This process is fully validated to kill or inactivate all classes of conventional pathogens, viruses, microbes, bacteria and fungi. Our BioCleanse process is able to remove greater than 99% of the blood, fats, lipids and other unwanted materials from the tissue we process. An important element of the BioCleanse process is that while it removes unwanted materials embedded within the tissue, it maintains the tissue structural integrity and compression strength. Studies have shown that tissue sterilized with BioCleanse maintains the same compression strength as untreated tissue and has significantly greater compression strength than tissue treated with other sterilization processes. The BioCleanse process has been reviewed by the FDA which concluded that BioCleanse was a validated tissue sterilization process demonstrated to prevent contamination and cross contamination of tissue grafts. The significance of the review is that we are not aware of any other tissue sterilization process related to human tissue in our industry that has been reviewed or approved by the FDA. The FDA does not have a formal approval process in place for tissue related processing techniques. Our BioCleanse process is currently used on most of our b1 allografts and most of our musculoskeletal soft tissue implants. In addition to the safety advantage of BioCleanse , it provides us with a number of significant research and development opportunities, including the ability to introduce b1 growth factors and anti bacterial, anti viral and cancer fighting agents into our implants. The TUTOPLAST Tissue Sterilization Solution The TUTOPLAST tissue sterilization process utilizes solvent dehydration and chemical inactivation to remove blood, lipids and extraneous materials, inactivate viruses and prions, and break down RNA and DNA into fragments not capable of replication and disease transmission while preserving the biological and mechanical properties. We apply the TUTOPLAST process to 2 types of preserved allografts soft tissue, consisting of fascia lata, fascia temporalis, pericardium, dermis and sclera; and b1 tissue; consisting of various configurations of cancellous and cortical b1 material. Processed pericardium, fascia lata and dermis are collagenous tissue used to repair, replace or line native connective tissue primarily in dental, ophthalmology, urology, plastic and reconstructive surgeries. Dermis is also used in hernia repair and pelvic floor reconstruction. Sclera is used in ophthalmology procedures such as anterior and posterior segment patch grafting applications for glaucoma, retina and trauma surgery and oculoplastics, as well as contour wrapping of an orbital implant. Processed cortical and cancellous b1 material is used in a wide variety of applications in spine, orthopedic and dental surgeries. The CANCELLE SP DBM Sterilization Process DBM based pastes and putties are sterilized through the CANCELLE SP process, which is designed to preserve protein activity. In their final form, the DBM implants serve as b1 void fillers in many applications, including spinal, general orthopedic, joint reconstruction and dental surgeries. CANCELLE SP is a proprietary process that sterilizes DBM pastes and putties while simultaneously allowing them to maintain their osteoinductive (OI) potential, which is verified by 100 percent lot testing after sterilization. The determination of OI potential is made by lot release animal studies or testing for certain protein markers. These tests are not necessarily predictive of human clinical results. Through a combination of oxidative treatments and acid or alcohol washes, debris is removed and pathogens are inactivated. Cleansing rinses remove residual chemicals, maintaining biocompatibility and preserving the utility of the graft. The CANCELLE SP irradiation dose is delivered terminally for pastes and putties to achieve device level sterility (SAL 10 6). 7 Tissue Recovery Tissue recovery is the actual removal of tissue from a donor after receiving appropriate consent. Consent is obtained by the tissue recovery group. We operate certain tissue recovery groups directly, and contract with other independent FDA registered tissue recovery groups which specialize in this activity. Tissue recovery personnel aseptically recover musculoskeletal tissue within 24 hours following a donor death, using surgical instruments and sterile techniques similar to those used in hospitals for routine surgery. Recovered tissue is placed on wet or dry ice and then transported by the donor recovery agency to the tissue processor or possibly a research institution. Under U.S. law, human tissue cannot be sold. However, the law permits the recovery of reasonable payments for the provision of certain services, such as those involved in recovering, processing and storing tissue and related to the advancement of tissue processing technologies, all types of activities in which we are involved. Donor recovery groups recover a variety of tissue types from donors including the fibula, femur, tibia, humerus, ilium, pericardium, fascia lata, dermis, sclera, tendons and ligaments. In addition to tissue received from recovery groups we control, we also receive donated tissue from independently registered tissue recovery organizations. To make an initial determination as to whether tissues may be appropriately recovered, these independent tissue recovery organizations are responsible for obtaining appropriate consents and conducting federally mandated donor screening, such as a medical and social history interview with the next of kin. Upon receipt of the tissue, we conduct pre processing donor screening to determine its medical suitability for transplantation. Pre processing screening performed by us includes laboratory testing and a donor eligibility assessment. With respect to laboratory testing, we perform an extensive panel of serological and microbiological tests. These results are subject to stringent criteria in order to release the donor tissue to the processing stage. We have relationships with over thirty tissue donor recovery agencies across the country. We also have relationships outside the United States. Our largest single donor recovery group represented 17% of our total donor tissue for the year ended December 31, 2012 We believe additional recovery group relationships would be available if needed and consequently that the loss of any 1 of our sources of donor tissue would not have a material impact on our operating results. We continue to develop new xenograft tissue implants. Implants processed from xenograft tissue are regulated by the FDA as devices and require approval or licenses from the FDA prior to marketing in the United States. The sources of our animal tissues are regulated closed herds. The herds are located in the United States and Australia. We believe the continued development of our xenograft implants will help us meet unmet demand for certain allografts and also allow us to develop new biological implants that cannot currently be made due to structural limitations of human tissue. Research and Development Our research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 were $122 million, $9.8 million and $9.4 million, respectively. In 2012, we continued to increase our investment in our R&D efforts by funding new projects including research and development projects at our facility in Neunkirchen, Germany. Our scientists are focusing their studies on delivering optimal regenerative medicine solutions through allograft and xenograft, as well as expanding the uses of the BioCleanse and TUTOPLAST , processing technologies. We plan to continue to develop new implants and technologies within our current markets, and to develop additional tissue related technologies for other markets. We plan to do this by building on our core technology platforms BioCleanse , TUTOPLAST , precision machining, assembled grafts, and tissue and mediated osteoinduction, We operate a dedicated research team working on advanced technologies, and have embedded development technical teams who work with the business marketing teams focused on expanding the scope and scale of existing competencies such as tissue sterilization and tissue machining to meet specific surgical needs. This approach has resulted in the development of core science platforms, a pipeline of concepts for development and marketing and focused development to meet immediate needs. In 2012 we launched 18 new implants in sports medicine, spine, surgical specialties and BGS and general orthopedic developed by our research and development teams. Intellectual Property Our business depends upon the significant know how and proprietary technology we have developed. To protect this know how and proprietary technology, we rely on a combination of trade secret laws, patents, licenses, trademarks and confidentiality agreements. The effect of these intellectual property rights is to define z1s of exclusive use of the covered intellectual property. 8 Our United States patent holdings include patents relating to or covering BioCleanse , our proprietary method of cleaning, sterilizing and virally inactivating donor tissue; our MD Series cortical b1 dowel; soft and calcified tissue implants; certain precision machined allograft intervertebral spacers and other spinal implants; matrix compositions comprised of gelatin, musculoskeletal tissue or pulverized dermis; the use of the interference screw technology; our segmentally demineralized graft; methods and instruments for improved meniscus transplantation; materials and methods for improved b1 tendon b1 transplantation; and various assembled b1 tendon b1 implant designs. Our foreign patent holdings include our MD Series cortical b1 dowel technology, our precision machined spinal implants, pre shaped b1 tendon b1 implants, and our BioCleanse process. The duration of patent rights generally is 20 years from the date of filing of priority application, while trademarks, once registered, are essentially perpetual. We also have patent applications pending in the U.S. (including continuation and divisional applications), and corresponding foreign patent applications pending in various countries including, but not limited to, Canada, Japan, Australia and the European Union. We have also entered into exclusive and non exclusive licenses relating to a wide array of third party technologies. In addition, we rely on our substantial body of know how, including proprietary tissue recovery techniques and processes, research and development, tissue processing and quality assurance. The TUTOPLAST process utilizes proprietary trade secrets. Our trademarks and service marks provide us and our products with a certain amount of brand recognition in our markets. However, we do not consider any single patent, trademark or service mark material to our financial condition or results of operations. No significant patents are expected to expire in the next five years. Competition Competition in the tissue reconstruction and healing industry is intense and subject to rapid technological change and evolving industry requirements and standards. Companies within the industry compete on the basis of design of related instrumentation, efficacy of products, relationships with the surgical community, depth of range of implants, scientific and clinical results, and pricing. Our allograft and xenograft implants compete with autograft, metals and synthetic tissues. Our principal competitors in the conventional allograft market include the Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation ( MTF ), AlloSource, LifeCell, Inc., a subsidiary of Kinetic Concepts Inc. and LifeNet. Among our competitors in precision machined allograft are MTF, LifeNet and AlloSource. Other companies who process and distribute allograft pastes include Medtronic, AlloSource, Integra, Wright, and MTF. Companies who process and distribute xenograft tissue include Synovis, LifeCell, Cook Surgical and Medtronic. Government Regulation Government regulation plays a significant role in the processing and distribution of allografts. We procure, process and market our tissue implants worldwide. Although some standards of harmonization exist, each country in which we do business has its own specific regulatory requirements. These requirements are dynamic in nature and, as such, are continually changing. New regulations may be promulgated at any time and with limited notice. While we believe that we are in compliance with all existing pertinent international and domestic laws and regulations, there can be no assurance that changes in governmental administrations and regulations will not adversely affect our operations. Failure to comply with applicable requirements could result in fines, injunctions, civil penalties, recall or seizure of products, suspension of production, inability to market current products, criminal prosecution, and or refusal of the government to authorize the marketing of new products. In the United States, our allograft implants are regulated by the FDA under Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 1270 and 1271, Current Good Tissue Practice for Human Cell, Tissue, and Cellular and Tissue Based Products (cGTP). Xenograft tissues and allograft b1 paste are regulated as medical devices and subject to FDA 21 CFR, Part 820. Current Good Manufacturing Practices for Medical Devices and related statutes from the FDA. In addition, our U.S. operation is subject to certain state and local regulations, as well as compliance to the standards of the tissue bank industry accrediting organization, the AATB. In Germany, allografts are classified as drugs and the German government regulates such implants in accordance with German Drug Law. On April 7, 2004, the European Commission issued a human tissue directive to regulate allografts within the European Union ( EU ). Our Neunkirchen facility is presently licensed by the German Health Authorities and in compliance with applicable international laws and regulations, allowing us to market our human and animal implants globally. 9 The FDA and international regulatory bodies conduct periodic compliance inspections of both our U.S. and our German processing facilities. Both operations are registered with the U.S. FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ) and are certified to ISO 134852003 The Alachua facility is also accredited by the AATB and is licensed in the states of Florida, New York, California, Maryland, Delaware and Illinois. The Neunkirchen facility is registered with the German Health Authority ( BfArM ) as a pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturer and is subject to German drug law. We believe that worldwide regulation of allografts and xenografts is likely to intensify as the international regulatory community focuses on the growing demand for these implants and the attendant safety and efficacy issues of citizen recipients. We currently market and distribute allografts that are subject to the FDA Human Tissue Intended for Transplantation and Human Cells, Tissues, and Cellular and Tissue Based Products regulations. Under these regulations, we are required to perform donor screening and infectious disease testing and to document this screening and testing for each donor from whom we process tissue, and to process tissues in compliance with cGTP. The FDA has authority under the rules to inspect human tissue processing facilities, and to detain, recall, or destroy tissues for which appropriate documentation and evidence of compliance is not available. We are not required to obtain pre market approval or clearance from the FDA for allografts that meet the regulation definition of human tissue. The FDA may regulate certain allografts as medical devices, drugs, or biologics, which would require that we obtain approval or product licensure from the FDA. This would occur in those cases where the allograft is deemed to have been more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use. In general, homologous use occurs when tissue is used for the same basic function that it fulfilled in the donor. The definitional criteria for making these determinations appear in the FDA rules. If the FDA decides that certain of our current or future allografts are more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use, it would require licensure, approval or clearances of those allografts. Allografts requiring such approval are subject to pervasive and continuing regulation by the FDA. We would be required to list these allografts as a drug, as a medical device, or as a biologic, and to manufacture them in specifically registered or licensed facilities in accordance with FDA regulation Current Good Manufacturing Practices. We would also be subject to post marketing surveillance and reporting requirements. In addition, our manufacturing facilities and processes would be subject to periodic inspection to assess compliance with Current Good Manufacturing Practices. Our labeling and promotional activities would be subject to scrutiny by the FDA and, in certain instances, by the Federal Trade Commission. The export of drugs, devices and biologics is also subject to more intensive regulation than is the case for human tissue products. On October 23, 2012, we received a warning letter from the FDA related to environmental monitoring activities in certain areas of our processing facility in Alachua, Florida. We are currently working with the FDA to resolve their concerns. The warning letter does not restrict our ability to process or distribute implants, nor does it require the withdrawal of any implants from the marketplace. Certain of our allograft pastes are subject to regulation as medical devices under the 510(k) pre market notification process because they incorporate a non human gelatin constituent as a carrier. We have received FDA clearance for our flowable and moldable allograft paste implants for orthopedic and spinal applications and for our allograft b1 paste for dental applications. Our xenograft implants are regulated by the FDA as medical devices and are subject to pre market approval or clearance by the FDA. Our xenograft implants are CE marked and are therefore subject to a design examination review by a Notified Body. In 2006, our US facility received initial CE mark approval for ten different implant models, followed by additional implant approvals in subsequent years. In 2009, the TMI facility received initial CE mark approval for nine different product models. In addition, the US facility received A Certificate of Suitability from the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare (EDQM) for bovine b1 in 2008. This certifies that the bovine b1 material complies with the European Pharmacopoeia monograph for products at risk for transmission of animal spongiform disease. The FDA requires tissue processors to register with the FDA and list their tissue implants. We are currently an FDA registered tissue processor. Our tissue processing generates by products classified as medical hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. All such by products must be segregated and properly disposed of in compliance with applicable environmental regulations. We believe that we are in compliance with the applicable regulations. 10 Environmental Our allografts and xenografts, as well as the chemicals used in processing, are handled and disposed of in accordance with country specific, federal, state and local regulations. We contract with independent, third parties to perform all gamma terminal sterilization of our allografts. In view of the engagement of a third party to perform irradiation services, the requirements for compliance with radiation hazardous waste does not apply, and therefore we do not anticipate that having any material adverse effect upon our capital expenditures, results of operations or financial condition. However, we are responsible for assuring that the service is being performed in accordance with applicable regulations. Employees As of December 31, 2012, we had a total of 756 employees (159 of whom were employed in Germany and 5 of whom were employed in France). Management believes its relations with its employees are good. Executive Officers of the Registrant Our executive officers and their respective ages and positions as of the date of this report and their previous business experience are as follows NAME AGE POSITION WITH THE COMPANY Brian K. Hutchison 53 President and Chief Executive Officer Robert P. Jordheim 49 Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer Thomas F. Rose 62 Executive Vice President, Chief Operations Officer and Secretary Roger W. Rose 53 President, RTI Donor Services, Executive Vice President and Chief Commercial Officer Caroline A. Hartill 56 Executive Vice President and Chief Scientific Officer Brian K. Hutchison joined RTI in December 2001 and was elected Chairman of the Board of Directors in December 2002 On May 5, 2011, Hutchison stepped down as Chairman while continuing to serve as President and Chief Executive Officer and a member of our Board of Directors. In this role, Hutchison oversees all aspects of the Company and its affiliates. Hutchison spent the previous 12 years with Stryker Corporation. He served most recently as vice president, worldwide product development and distribution. Hutchison earned a bachelor degree in business administration from Grand Valley State University in 1981 He also completed the Program for Management Development from Harvard Business School in 1995. Robert P. Jordheim joined RTI in June, 2010 as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, and oversees all aspects of finance for the Company. Jordheim has 24 years of progressive corporate finance experience, including 17 years with Medtronic, Inc. Most recently, he served as Vice President, Finance and Business Development for Medtronic Spinal and Biologics business unit. Previously, he served as Vice President, Finance for Medtronic Surgical Technologies business unit. His tenure with Medtronic also included responsibilities in corporate development and international experience gained through a five year assignment in Europe. Previous to his tenure at Medtronic, Jordheim served as Manager of External Reporting at The Fairchild Corporation and as an auditor for Deloitte & Touche LLP. Jordheim earned a bachelor degree in business administration from Southern Methodist University and a master degree in business administration from the University of Pittsburgh with a concentration in finance. Thomas F. Rose was named Executive Vice President and Chief Operations Officer in June, 2010. He also serves as Corporate Secretary to the Board of Directors. Rose joined the Company as Vice President and Chief Financial Officer in May 2002 and served as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer until June 2010. Rose served the previous 10 years as Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at A.M. Todd Group. Rose earned a bachelor degree in business administration from Western Michigan University. He has also completed numerous executive education courses at University of Michigan and Northwestern University focusing on strategy and organizational issues. Roger W. Rose was named Executive Vice President and Chief Commercial Officer in June, 2010. In February 2008, he was named President of RTI Donor Services, and, in August 2004, he was named Executive Vice President of RTI. Rose oversees all aspects of the organization not for profit affiliate, RTI Donor Services, marketing, and the distribution of donated tissue back into the community. Rose joined RTI as Vice President of Donor Services in October 2002 and assumed additional responsibility for distribution and marketing in October 2003 Prior to this, Rose spent seven 11 years at Stryker Corporation where he held leadership positions in sales and marketing in both the medical and orthopedic divisions. Rose earned a bachelor degree in business administration from Western Michigan University and completed numerous executive education courses at UCLA, University of Michigan and Harvard Business School, focusing on finance, leadership, medical marketing, negotiation and strategy. Caroline A. Hartill was named Executive Vice President and Chief Scientific Officer on June 21, 2010. She was named Chief Scientific Officer in March 2007. She joined RTI in November 2001 and was named Vice President of Quality Assurance and Regulatory Affairs in January 2003 In her role at RTI, Hartill oversees all research and development, quality assurance, regulatory affairs and clinical studies. She has served as a board member for BioFlorida and is chair for the Tissue Products Workgroup of the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed). She also serves as chair of the Accreditation Committee of the American Association of Tissue Banks (AATB) and is an appointed member of the Agency for Healthcare Administration (AHCA), State of Florida Organ and Tissue Transplant Advisory Committee. For the previous 18 years, she worked in the areas of technology development and market approvals as a consultant working with many major and start up biotechnology and medical device companies worldwide. Hartill earned a Bachelor degree with honors in Health Sciences from Birmingham University Medical School in England, as well as a Master degree in Management from the University of Wolverhampton in England. Hartill has also earned Master level credits in Sterilization Science from Manchester University. Available Information Our Internet address is www.rtix.com. Information included on our website is not incorporated by reference in our Form 10 K. We make available, free of charge, on or through the investor relations portion of our website, our annual reports on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q and current reports on Form 8 K and amendments to such reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), as soon as reasonably practicable after we file such material with, or furnish it to the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). These filings are also available on the SEC website at www.sec.gov. Also available on our website is our Code of Conduct, our Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Professionals, our California Compliance Program Declaration and the charters for our Audit Committee, Compensation Committee, Nominating and Governance Committee and Science and Technology Committee. Within the time period required by the SEC and Nasdaq, we will post any amendment to our Code of Ethics for our Senior Financial Professionals and any waiver of our Code of Conduct applicable to our senior financial professionals, executive officers and directors. 12 Item 1A. RISK FACTORS An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should consider each of the risks and uncertainties described in this section and all of the other information in this document before deciding to invest in our common stock. Any of the risk factors we describe below could severely harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. The market price of our common stock could decline if any of these risks or uncertainties develops into actual events. You may lose all or part of the m1y you pay to buy our common stock. We depend heavily upon sources of human tissue, and any failure to obtain tissue from these sources in a timely manner will interfere with our ability to process and distribute allografts. The supply of human tissue has at times limited our growth, and may not be sufficient to meet our future needs. In addition, due to seasonal changes in mortality rates, some scarce tissues that we currently use for allografts are at times in particularly short supply. Other factors, some of which are unpredictable, such as negative publicity and regulatory actions in the industry in which we operate also could unexpectedly reduce the available supply of tissue. We rely on donor recovery groups for their human tissue supplies and we have relationships with over thirty tissue donor recovery agencies across the country. We also have relationships outside the United States. Donor recovery groups are part of relatively complex relationships. They provide support to donor families, are regulated by the FDA, and are often affiliated with hospitals, universities or organ procurement organizations. Our relationships with donor recovery groups, which are critical to our supply of tissue, could be affected by relationships recovery groups have with other organizations. Any negative impact of the regulatory and disease transmission issues facing the industry, as well as the negative publicity that these issues create, could adversely affect our ability to negotiate contracts with recovery groups. We cannot be sure that the supply of human tissue will continue to be available at current levels or will be sufficient to meet our needs. If we are not able to obtain tissue from current sources sufficient to meet our needs, we may not be able to locate additional replacement sources of tissue on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Any interruption of our business caused by the need to locate additional sources of tissue would significantly impact our revenues. We expect that our revenues would decline in proportion to any decline in tissue supply. If we fail to maintain existing strategic relationships or are unable to identify distributors of our implants, revenues may decrease. We currently derive the majority of our revenues through our relationships with Medtronic, Zimmer, Davol, Stryker and Exactech. In addition, our spine distributors provide nearly all of the instrumentation, surgeon training, distribution assistance and marketing materials for the lines of spinal allografts they distribute. Variations in the timing and volume of orders by Medtronic and Zimmer may have a material effect upon our revenues. If our relationships with Medtronic or Zimmer are terminated or reduced for any reason and we are unable to replace these relationships with other means of distribution, we would suffer a material decrease in revenues. We may need to obtain the assistance of additional distributors to market and distribute our new allografts and technologies, as well as to market and distribute our existing allografts and technologies to new markets or geographical areas. We may not be able to find additional distributors who will agree to and successfully market and distribute our allografts and technologies on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to establish additional distribution relationships on favorable terms, our revenues may decline. If third party payors fail to provide appropriate levels of reimbursement for the use of our implants, revenues could be adversely affected. Political, economic and regulatory influences are subjecting the healthcare industry in the United States to fundamental change. In March 2010, President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law. The new law will result in sweeping changes across the health care industry. The primary goal of this comprehensive legislation is to extend health coverage to approximately 32 million uninsured legal U.S. residents through a combination of public program expansion and private sector health insurance reforms. To fund the expansion of insurance coverage, the legislation contains measures designed to promote quality and cost efficiency in health care delivery and to generate budgetary savings in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. We are unable to predict the full impact of the Affordable Care Act at this time due to the law complexity and current lack of implementing regulations or interpretive guidance. However, we expect that several provisions of the Affordable Care Act could have a material effect on our business. 13 Our revenues will largely depend on the reimbursement of patients medical expenses by government health care programs and private health insurers. Governments and private insurers closely examine medical procedures incorporating new technologies to determine whether the procedures will be covered by payment, and if so, the level of payment which may apply. We cannot be sure that third party payors will continue to reimburse for our implants at the current levels. If we fail to maintain the high processing standards that implants require or if we are unable to develop processing capacity as required, our commercial opportunity will be reduced or eliminated. Implants require careful calibration and precise, high quality processing. Achieving precision and quality control requires skill and diligence by our personnel. If we fail to achieve and maintain these high processing standards, including avoiding processing errors, and, depending on the nature of the complaint, design defects or comp1nt failures; we would be forced to recall, withdraw or suspend distribution of our implants; our implants and technologies could fail quality assurance and performance tests; production and deliveries of our implants could be delayed or cancelled; and our processing costs could increase. Further, to be successful, we will need to manage our human tissue processing capacity related to tissue recovery and demand for our allografts. It may be difficult for us to match our processing capacity to demand due to problems related to the amount of suitable tissue, quality control and assurance, tissue availability, adequacy of control policies and procedures, and lack of skilled personnel. If we are unable to process and produce our implants on a timely basis, at acceptable quality and costs, and in sufficient quantities, or if we experience unanticipated technological problems or delays in processing, it will reduce revenues and increase our cost per allograft processed. We operate in a highly regulated industry. An inability to meet current or future regulatory requirements in the United States or foreign jurisdictions, or any deficiencies with our manufacturing or quality systems and processes identified by regulatory agencies, could disrupt our business, subject us to regulatory action and costly litigation, damage our reputation for high quality production, cause a loss of confidence in the company and our products and negatively impact our financial position and operating results. The FDA and several states have statutory authority to regulate allograft processing, including our BioCleanse and TUTOPLAST processes, and allograft based materials. We must register our facilities, whether located in the United States or elsewhere, with the FDA as well as regulators outside the United States, and our products must be made in a manner consistent with current good tissue practices ( cGTP ), or similar standards in each territory in which we manufacture. In addition, the FDA and other agencies perform periodic audits to ensure that our facilities remain in compliance with all appropriate regulations, including primarily the quality system regulations and medical device reporting regulations. Following an inspection, an agency may issue a notice listing conditions that are believed to violate cGTP or other regulations (such as a FDA report on Form 483, Notice of Observations), or a warning letter for violations of regulatory significance that may result in enforcement action if not promptly and adequately corrected. For example, in June and July 2012, the FDA performed a cGTP inspection of our processing facility in Alachua, Florida to audit our compliance with cGTP requirements. The inspection was a directed inspection following termination of an employee. The inspection was not related to a specific product. At the conclusion of the audit, the FDA inspectors issued a Form FD483, primarily related to environmental monitoring activities in certain areas of our Alachua facility. We provided timely and detailed responses to the FD483, including commitments and timelines for the remediation of the conditions cited by the FDA. We subsequently received a warning letter related to some of the FD483 inspectional findings in which the FDA raised certain remaining questions and concerns. We have responded to the issues cited in the warning letter and have submitted information to the FDA to address their concerns. We believe that the remedial actions we have taken adequately respond to the FDA warning letter, but the FDA may conclude that our actions are insufficient to meet regulatory standards. In addition, the FDA could identify other deficiencies in future inspections of our facilities or those of our suppliers. Since 2009, the FDA has significantly increased its oversight of companies subject to its regulations, including medical device companies, by hiring new investigators and stepping up inspections of manufacturing facilities. In recent years, the FDA has also significantly increased the number of warning letters issued to companies. If the FDA were to conclude that we are not in compliance with applicable laws or regulations, or that any of our implants are ineffective or pose an unreasonable health risk, the FDA could ban such implants, detain or seize adulterated or misbranded implants, order a recall, repair, replacement, or refund of such implants, refuse to grant pending premarket approval applications or require certificates of foreign governments for exports and or require us to notify health professionals and others that the implants present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also impose operating restrictions, enjoin and restrain certain violations of applicable law pertaining to medical devices and assess civil or 14 criminal penalties against our officers, employees or us. The FDA may also recommend prosecution to the Department of Justice. Any adverse regulatory action, depending on its magnitude, may restrict us from effectively marketing and selling our products. Any inability to meet current or future regulatory requirements in the United States or foreign jurisdictions, or any deficiencies with our manufacturing or quality systems and processes identified by regulatory agencies could disrupt our business, subject us to regulatory action and costly litigation, damage our reputation for high quality production, cause a loss of confidence in the company and our products and negatively impact our financial position and operating results. If any of our allografts fall under the FDA definitions of more than minimally manipulated or indicated for non homologous use, we would be required to obtain medical device approval or clearance or biologics licenses, which could require clinical testing and could result in disapproval of our license applications and restricted distribution of any of our allografts which may become subject to pre market approval. The FDA could require post market testing and surveillance to monitor the effects of such allografts, could restrict the commercial applications of these allografts, and could conduct periodic inspections of our facilities and our suppliers. Delays encountered during the FDA approval process could shorten the patent protection period during which we have the exclusive right to commercialize such technologies or could allow others to come to market before us with similar technologies. cGTP covers all stages of allograft processing, from procurement of tissue to distribution of final allografts. These regulations increased regulatory scrutiny within the industry in which we operate and have led to increased enforcement action which affects the conduct of our business. In addition, these regulations have a significant effect upon recovery agencies which supply us with tissue and increase the cost of recovery activities. Any such increase would translate into increased costs, as we would expect to reimburse the recovery agencies based on their cost of recovery. In addition to the FDA, several state agencies regulate tissue banking. Regulations issued by Florida, New York, California and Maryland will be particularly relevant to our business. Most states do not currently have tissue banking regulations, but this status could change. It is possible that others may make allegations against us or against donor recovery groups or tissue banks, including those with which we have relationships, about non compliance with applicable FDA regulations or other relevant statutes and regulations. Allegations like these could cause regulators or other authorities to take investigative or other action, or could cause negative publicity for our business and the industry in which we operate. Some of our implants contain tissue derived from animals, commonly referred to as xenografts. Xenograft implants are medical devices that are subject to pre market approval or clearance by the FDA. We have received FDA clearance on several xenograft implants. However, we may not receive FDA approval or clearance to market new implants as we attempt to expand the quantity of xenograft implants available for distribution. The allograft industry is subject to additional local, state, federal and international government regulations and any increased regulations of our activities could significantly increase the cost of doing business, thereby reducing profitability. Some aspects of our business are subject to additional local, state, federal or international regulation. Changes in the laws or new interpretations of existing laws could negatively affect our business, revenues or prospects, and increase the costs associated with conducting our business. In particular, the procurement and transplantation of allograft tissue is subject to federal regulation under the National Organ Transplant Act, or NOTA, a criminal statute that prohibits the purchase and sale of human organs, including b1 and other tissue. NOTA permits the payment of reasonable fees associated with the transportation, processing, preservation, quality control and storage of human tissue. If NOTA were amended or interpreted in a way that made us unable to include some of these costs in the amounts we charge our customers, it could reduce our revenues and therefore negatively impact our business. It is possible that more restrictive interpretations or expansions of NOTA could be adopted which could require us to change 1 or more aspects of our business, at a substantial cost, in order to continue to comply with this statute. A variety of additional local, state, federal and international government laws and regulations govern our business, including those relating to the storage, handling, generation, manufacture, disposal of medical wastes from the processing of tissue, and collaborations with health care professionals. If we fail to conduct our business in compliance with these laws and regulations, we could be subject to significant liabilities for which our insurance may not be adequate. Moreover, such insurance may not always be available in the future on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If our insurance proves to be inadequate to pay a damage award, we may not have sufficient funds to do so, which would harm our financial condition and liquidity. 15 Our success depends on the continued acceptance of our allograft and xenograft implants and technologies by the medical community. New allograft and xenograft implants, technologies or enhancements to our existing implants may never achieve broad market acceptance, which can be affected by numerous factors, including lack of clinical acceptance of implants and technologies; introduction of competitive tissue repair treatment options which render implants and technologies too expensive or obsolete; lack of availability of third party reimbursement; and difficulty training surgeons in the use of tissue implants and technologies. Market acceptance will also depend on our ability to demonstrate that our existing and new implants and technologies are an attractive alternative to existing tissue repair treatment options. Our ability to do so will depend on surgeons evaluations of the clinical safety, efficacy, ease of use, reliability and cost effectiveness of these tissue repair options and technologies. For example, we believe that some in the medical community have lingering concerns over the risk of disease transmission through the use of allografts. Furthermore, we believe that even if the medical community generally accepts our implants and technologies, acceptance and recommendations by influential surgeons will be important to their broad commercial success. If our implants and technologies are not broadly accepted in the marketplace, we may not achieve a competitive position in the market. Rapid technological changes could result in reduced demand for our implants. Technologies change rapidly in the industry in which we operate. For example, steady improvements have been made in synthetic human tissue substitutes which compete with our tissue implants. Unlike allografts, synthetic tissue technologies are not dependent on the availability of tissue. If 1 of our competitors successfully introduces synthetic technologies using recombinant technologies, which stimulate the growth of tissue surrounding an implant, it could result in a decline in demand for tissue implants. We may not be able to respond effectively to technological changes and emerging industry standards, or to successfully identify, develop or support new technologies or enhancements to existing implants in a timely and cost effective manner, if at all. If we are unable to achieve the improvements in our implants necessary for their successful commercialization, the demand for our implants will suffer. We face intense competition, which could result in reduced acceptance and demand for our implants and technologies. The medical technology biotechnology industry is intensely competitive. We compete with companies in the United States and internationally that engage in the development and production of medical technologies and processes including biotechnology, orthopedic, pharmaceutical, biomaterial and other companies; academic and scientific institutions; and public and private research organizations. Many of our competitors have much greater financial, technical, research, marketing, distribution, service and other resources than ours. Moreover, our competitors may offer a broader array of tissue repair treatment products and technologies or may have greater name recognition in the marketplace. For example, we compete with a number of divisions of Johnson & Johnson, a company with significantly greater resources and brand recognition than ours. Our competitors, including several development stage companies, may develop or market technologies that are more effective or commercially attractive than our technologies, or that may render our technologies obsolete. For example, the development of a synthetic tissue product that permits remodeling of b1s could reduce the demand for allograft and xenograft based products and technologies. If we do not manage the medical release of donor tissue into processing in an effective and efficient manner, it could adversely affect profitability. Many factors affect the level and timing of donor medical releases, including the effectiveness of donor screening performed by donor recovery groups, the timely receipt, recording and review of required medical documentation, and employee loss and turnover in our medical records department. We can provide no assurance that releases will occur at levels which maximize our processing efficiency and minimize our cost per allograft processed. 16 Negative publicity concerning methods of human tissue recovery and screening of donor tissue in the industry in which we operate may reduce demand for our allografts and impact the supply of available donor tissue. Media reports or other negative publicity concerning both methods of tissue recovery from donors and actual or potential disease transmission from donated tissue may limit widespread acceptance of our allografts, whether directed to allografts generally or our allografts specifically. Unfavorable reports of improper or illegal tissue recovery practices, both in the United States and internationally, as well as incidents of improperly processed tissue leading to transmission of disease, may broadly affect the rate of future tissue donation and market acceptance of allograft technologies. Potential patients may not be able to distinguish our allografts, technologies and the tissue recovery and the processing procedures from those of our competitors or others engaged in tissue recovery. In addition, families of potential donors may become reluctant to agree to donate tissue to for profit tissue processors. If our patents and the other means we use to protect our intellectual property prove to be inadequate, our competitors could exploit our intellectual property to compete more effectively against us. The law of patents and trade secrets is constantly evolving and often involves complex legal and factual questions. The U.S. government may deny or significantly reduce the coverage we seek for our patent applications before or after a patent is issued. We cannot be sure that any particular patent for which we apply will be issued, that the scope of the patent protection will be comprehensive enough to provide adequate protection from competing technologies, that interference proceedings regarding any of our patent applications will not be filed, or that we will achieve any other competitive advantage from a patent. In addition, it is possible that 1 or more of our patents will be held invalid if challenged or that others will claim rights in or ownership of our patents and other proprietary rights. If any of these events occur, our competitors may be able to use our intellectual property to compete more effectively against us. Because patent applications are secret until patents are actually issued (or until 18 months after a patent application has been filed) and the publication of discoveries in the scientific or patent literature lags behind actual discoveries, we cannot be certain that our patent application was the first application filed covering a particular invention. If another party rights to an invention are superior to ours, we may not be able to obtain a license to use that party invention on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. In addition, our competitors, many of which have greater resources than ours, could obtain patents that will prevent, limit or interfere with our ability to make use of our inventions either in the United States or in international markets. Further, the laws of some foreign countries do not always protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Litigation or regulatory proceedings in the United States or foreign countries also may be necessary to enforce our patent or other intellectual property rights or to determine the scope and validity of the proprietary rights of our competitors. These proceedings can be costly, result in development delays, and divert the attention of our management. We rely upon unpatented proprietary techniques and processes in tissue recovery, research and development, tissue processing and quality assurance. It is possible that others will independently develop technology similar to our technology or otherwise gain access to or disclose our proprietary technologies. We may not be able to meaningfully protect our rights in these proprietary technologies, which would reduce our ability to compete. Our success depends in part on our ability to operate without infringing on or misappropriating the proprietary rights of others, and if we are unable to do so we may be liable for damages. We cannot be certain that U.S. or foreign patents or patent applications of other companies do not exist or will not be issued that would prevent us from commercializing our allografts and technologies. Third parties may sue us for infringing or misappropriating their patent or other intellectual property rights. Intellectual property litigation is costly. If we do not prevail in litigation, in addition to any damages we might have to pay, we could be required to stop the infringing activity or obtain a license requiring us to make royalty payments. It is possible that a required license will not be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. In addition, a required license may be non exclusive, and therefore our competitors may have access to the same technology licensed to us. If we fail to obtain a required license or are unable to design around another company patent, we may be unable to make use of some of the affected technologies or distribute the affected allografts, which would reduce our revenues. The defense costs and settlements for patent infringement lawsuits are not covered by insurance. Patent infringement lawsuits can take years to settle. If we are not successful in our defenses or are not successful in obtaining dismissals of any such lawsuit, legal fees or settlement costs could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial position. 17 We or our competitors may be exposed to product or professional liability claims which could cause us to be liable for damages or cause investors to think we will be liable for similar claims in the future. The development of allografts and technologies for human tissue repair and treatment entails an inherent risk of product or professional liability claims, and substantial product or professional liability claims may be asserted against us. We are party to a number of legal proceedings relating to professional liability. The prevailing view among the states throughout the United States is that providing allografts is a service and not the sale of a product. As such, allografts are not subject to product liability causes of action. However, the law of a particular state could change in response to legislative changes or by judicial interpretation in a state where such issue has either not been previously addressed or prior precedent is overturned or subject to different interpretations by a court of higher precedential authority. In addition, due to the international scope of our activities we are subject to different laws which may treat allografts as products in those jurisdictions. The implantation of donated human tissue implants creates the potential for transmission of communicable diseases. Although we comply with Federal and state regulations and guidelines intended to prevent communicable disease transmission, and our tissue suppliers are also required to comply with such regulations, there can be no assurances that (i) our tissue suppliers will comply with such regulations intended to prevent communicable disease transmissions; (ii) even if such compliance is achieved, that our implants have not been or will not be associated with transmission of disease; or (iii) a patient otherwise infected with disease would not err1ously assert a claim that the use of our implants resulted in disease transmission. We currently have $20 million of product and professional liability insurance to cover claims. This amount of insurance may not be adequate for potential claims if we are not successful in our defenses. Moreover, insurance covering our business may not always be available in the future on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If our insurance proves to be inadequate to pay a damage award, we may not have sufficient funds to do so, which would harm our financial condition and liquidity. In addition, successful product liability claims made against 1 of our competitors could cause claims to be made against us or expose us to a perception that we are vulnerable to similar claims. Claims against us, regardless of their merit or potential outcome, may also hurt our ability to obtain surgeon acceptance of our allografts or to expand our business. If we are not successful in expanding our distribution activities into international markets, we will not be able to pursue 1 of our strategies for increasing revenues. Our international distribution strategies vary by market, as well as within each country in which we operate. For example, we distribute only a portion of our line of allograft and xenograft products within each country. Our international operations will be subject to a number of risks which may vary from the risks we face in the United States, including the need to obtain regulatory approvals in additional foreign countries before we can offer our implants and technologies for use; longer distribution to collection cycles, as well as difficulty in collecting accounts receivable; dependence on local distributors; limited protection of intellectual property rights; fluctuations in the values of foreign currencies; and political and economic instability. The outcome of litigation or arbitration in which we are involved is unpredictable and an adverse decision in any such matter could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. We are from time to time subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. For example, we have been named as a party, along with a number of other recovery and processor defendants, in lawsuits relating to the tissue recovery practices of BTS, an unaffiliated recovery agency and BTS owner, Michael Mastromarino, as well as several funeral homes and their owners with which BTS conducted its affairs. These cases generally allege that we have liability for interference with the rights of the surviving next of kin as perpetrated by BTS and the funeral homes. As a result of increased judicial clarity during the second quarter of 2012 regarding timing of litigation, and anticipated increases in legal activity and expense flowing therefrom, we determined that the cost of continuing an aggressive legal defense for certain of the lawsuits would be significant. Therefore, in order to mitigate our financial exposure, an agreement was reached to settle 29 of the lawsuits for which our insurer was not paying for the legal fees. Pursuant to the settlement of these lawsuits, we recorded a litigation settlement charge of $24 million in the second quarter of 2012, which was paid in the third quarter of 2012 As of December 31, 2012, there are 42 remaining lawsuits pending against us. Through our affiliation with RTIDS, we currently have $2 million in answerable indemnity insurance, with non eroding defense limits. Of the remaining 42 pending cases, our insurer is presently paying the legal fees and costs for 32 cases. Coverage for the remaining cases are either being disclaimed by our insurer or coverage is not presently available due to RTIDS not having 18 been named as a co defendant. We believe this disclaimer of coverage is improper, and have brought a declaratory action against the insurer to obtain a judgment ordering coverage on these disclaimed cases. As part of this action, the insurer is seeking to confirm its initial disclaimer, as well as seeking to disclaim coverage on the 32 cases for which it is presently paying fees. Pending resolution of the declaratory action, or if the declaratory action is not resolved in our favor, we will be responsible for paying both the legal fees incurred starting March 22, 2012, and any indemnification that may be owed in connection with those disclaimed cases. With respect to the remaining 42 cases, they are currently divided among courts located in the state court system of New York, and the Federal Court in New Jersey. Neither the rulings of the courts nor reactions of juries can be predicted with reasonable reliability, and laws in the jurisdictions may be subject to change or differing interpretation. The ultimate resolution of the matters could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. An adverse resolution of lawsuits or arbitrations could adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. Any acquisitions we make may require the issuance of a significant amount of equity or debt securities and may not be scientifically or commercially successful. As part of our business strategy, we may perform acquisitions to obtain additional businesses, product and or process technologies, capabilities and personnel. If we make 1 or more significant acquisitions in which the consideration includes securities, we may be required to issue a substantial amount of equity, debt, warrants, convertible instruments or other similar securities. Such an issuance could dilute your investment in our common stock or increase our interest expense and other expenses. Further, acquisitions involve a number of operational risks, such as difficulty and expense of assimilating the operations, technology and personnel of the acquired business; our inability to retain the management, key personnel and other employees of the acquired business; our inability to maintain the acquired company relationship with key third parties, such as alliance partners; exposure to legal claims for activities of the acquired business prior to the acquisition; the diversion of our management attention from our core business; and the potential impairment of goodwill and write off of in process research and development costs, adversely affecting our reported results of operations. Any 1 of these risks could prevent an acquisition from being scientifically or commercially successful, which could have a material impact on our results of operations not only with respect to the operations of the acquired company but with respect to us on a consolidated basis. Item 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 Item 2 Item 2 PROPERTIES. 
