CIK: 1196298
Company Name: NEPHROS INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-03-04
Accession Number: 0001144204-13-012708


Item 1 Business Overview Nephros is a commercial stage medical device company that develops and sells high performance liquid purification filters. Our filters, which we call ultrafilters, are primarily used in dialysis centers and healthcare facilities for the production of ultrapure water and bicarbonate. Because our ultrafilters capture contaminants as small as 0.005 microns in size, they eliminate a wide variety of bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and endotoxins harmful to humans. All of our ultrafilters use proprietary hollow fiber technology. We believe the hollow fiber design allows our ultrafilters to be the only commercially available filters for healthcare applications that optimize the 3 elements critical to filter performance Filtration as low as 0.005 microns Flow rate minimal disruption Filter life up to 12 months By comparison, competitive filters on the market today are typically effective only to the 0.2 micron level and are pr1 to clog more quickly, thus reducing their useful lives. We were founded in 1997 by healthcare professionals affiliated with Columbia University Medical Center New York Presbyterian Hospital to develop and commercialize an alternative method to hemodialysis (HD). In 2009, we began to extend our filtration technologies to meet the demand for liquid purification in other areas, in particular water purification. Our Products Presently, we offer seven types of ultrafilters for sale to customers in four markets Dialysis Centers Water Bicarbonate Treatment of both water and bicarbonate for the production of ultrapure dialysate Hospitals and Other Healthcare Facilities Removal of infectious agents in drinking and bathing water, particularly in high risk patient areas Military Highly compact, individual water treatment devices used by soldiers to produce safe drinking water in the field Dialysis Centers Blood Clearance of toxins from blood using an alternative method to HD in patients with chronic renal failure We have designed our ultrafilters as either in line products, filters that are incorporated into the existing plumbing of healthcare facilities, or point of use products, filters that can be easily installed onto a faucet or as a replacement shower head or can be used stand al1 to purify small quantities of water immediately prior to use. Our Target Markets Dialysis Centers Water Bicarbonate . To perform hemodialysis, all dialysis clinics have dedicated water purification systems to produce pure water and bicarbonate. Water and bicarbonate are essential ingredients for making dialysate, the liquid that removes waste material from the blood. Within the U.S., there are approximately 5,700 clinics with 100,000 dialysis machines providing over 50 million dialysis treatments to 370,000 patients annually. Medicare is the main payor for dialysis treatment in the U.S. To be eligible for Medicare reimbursement, dialysis centers must meet the minimum standards for water and bicarbonate quality set by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the International Standards Organization (ISO). We anticipate that the stricter standards approved by these organizations in 2009 will be adopted by Medicare in the near future. Published studies have shown that the use of ultrapure dialysate can make patients healthier and reduce their dependence on erythropoietin (EPO), an expensive drug used in conjunction with HD. By reducing the level of dialysate contaminants, specifically cytokine inducing substances that can pass into a patient blood stream, cytokine levels within a patient stay low, thus reducing systemic inflammation. When inflammation is low, inflammatory morbidities are reduced and a patient responsiveness to EPO is enhanced, consequently the overall need for the drug is reduced. 4 We believe that our ultrafilters are attractive to dialysis centers because they exceed currently approved and newly proposed standards for water bicarbonate purity and help dialysis centers reduce costs associated with the amount of EPO required to treat a patient. Our in line filters are easily installed into the fluid circuits supplying water and bicarbonate just prior to entering each dialysis machine. Hospitals and Other Healthcare Facilities . According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), healthcare acquired infections (HAIs) annually account for 17 million infections, 99,000 deaths, and $4.5 $6.5 billion in extra costs in U.S. hospitals. At the root of many HAIs are waterborne pathogens such as Legi1lla and Pseudomonas which can thrive in aging or complex plumbing systems often found in healthcare facilities. According to the CDC, 23% of Legi1lla infections originate in healthcare facilities and Pseudomonas infections account for 10% of all water related HAIs. These pathogens are most harmful to patients in intensive care, neonatal, burn, cancer, and transplant units. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) which was passed in March 2010 puts in place comprehensive health insurance reforms that aim to lower costs and enhance quality of care. With its implementation, healthcare providers have substantial incentives to deliver better care or be forced to absorb the expenses associated with repeat medical procedures or complications like HAIs. The ACA encompasses HAIs and shifts the costs associated with their treatment back onto the healthcare provider. As a consequence, hospitals and other healthcare facilities are proactively implementing strategies to reduce the potential for HAIs. Our ultrafilters are designed to reduce the risk of HAIs in the hospital healthcare setting by treating water just prior to use. Our products can be used for reactive infection control. For example, during acute disease outbreaks (such as Legionnaires disease), our ultrafilters have been used at hospitals and other healthcare facilities to quickly and efficiently assist in the control of such outbreaks. Our ultrafilters are also being used as a preventative measure in healthcare facilities, particularly in areas where high risk patients are being treated. Our point of use filters can be easily installed onto the end of faucets or as replacement shower heads. Military . The military is heavily reliant on the use of bottled water to support its soldiers in the field. Bottled water is not always available, is very costly to move, resource intensive, and pr1 to constant supply disruptions. We offer our individual water treatment device (IWTD), which allows a soldier in the field to derive biologically safe water from any fresh water source. Our IWTD is available in both in line and point of use configurations. Our IWTD is 1 of the few portable filters that has been validated by the military to meet the NSF Protocol P248 standard and could become more widely used by soldiers in the future. To date, we have received purchase orders for approximately 2,000 IWTDs from individual units of the U.S. armed forces. Dialysis Centers Blood. The current standard of care in the U.S. for patients with chronic renal failure is HD, a process in which toxins are cleared via diffusion. Patients typically receive HD treatment at least 3 times weekly for 3 4 hours per treatment. HD is most effective in removing smaller, easily diffusible toxins. For patients with acute renal failure, the current standard of care in the U.S. is hemofiltration (HF), a process where toxins are cleared via convection. HF offers a much better removal of larger sized toxins when compared to HD. However, HF treatment is performed on a daily basis, and typically takes 12 24 hours. Hemodiafiltration (HDF) is an alternative dialysis modality that combines the benefits of HD and HF into a single therapy by clearing toxins using both diffusion and convection. Though not widely used in the U.S., HDF is much more prevalent in Europe and is performed in approximately 16% of patients. Clinical experience and literature show the following multiple clinical and patient benefits of HDF Enhanced clearance of middle and large molecular weight toxins Improved survival up to a 35% reduction in mortality risk Reduction in the occurrence of dialysis related amyloidosis Reduction in inflammation Reduction in medication such as EPO and phosphate binders Improved patient quality of life Reduction in number of hospitalizations and overall length of stay However, like HF, HDF can be resource intensive and can require a significant amount of time to deliver 1 course of treatment. We have developed a modified approach to HDF which is more patient friendly, less resource intensive, and can be used in conjunction with current HD machines. We refer to our approach as an on line mid dilution hemodiafiltration (mid HDF) system and it consists of our OLp r H2H Module and OLp r MD 220 Hemodiafilter. On April 30, 2012, we announced that we received clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to market the OLp r H2H Module and OLp r MD 220 Hemodiafilter for use with a UF controlled hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of patients with chronic renal failure in the United States. Like HD, on line mid HDF treatment is given to patients at least 3 times weekly for 3 4 hours per treatment. Our mid HDF system is the only HDF system of its kind to be cleared by the FDA to date. 5 We have not begun to broadly market our mid HDF system and plan to seek a commercialization partner in the U.S. We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware in April 1997. Our principal executive offices are located at 41 Grand Avenue, River Edge, New Jersey, 07661, and our teleph1 number is (201) 343 5202 We also have an office in Dublin, Ireland. For more information about Nephros, please visit our website at www.nephros.com . Going Concern The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. Our recurring losses and difficulty in generating sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations and sustain our operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We have incurred significant losses in operations in each quarter since inception. For the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, we incurred net losses of $3,262,000 and $2,360,000, respectively. In addition, we have not generated positive cash flow from operations for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 To become profitable, we must increase revenue substantially and achieve and maintain positive gross and operating margins. If we are not able to increase revenue and gross and operating margins sufficiently to achieve profitability, our results of operations and financial condition will be materially and adversely affected. On February 4, 2013, we issued a senior secured note to Lambda Investors LLC in the principal amount of $13 million. We expect that the proceeds from the note will allow us to fund our operations through May 2013 The note bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum and matures on August 4, 2013, at which time all principal and accrued interest will be due. However, we have agreed to prepay amounts due under the note with the cash proceeds from (a) a rights offering and an offering of a discounted exercise price to public warrantholders, each as further described in the note, (b) any other equity or debt financing, or (c) the issuance or incurrence of any other indebtedness or the sale of any assets outside the ordinary course of business, in each case prior to the maturity date. If we do not pay principal and interest under the note when due, the interest rate increases to 16% per annum. In connection with the note, we have agreed to pay Lambda Investors an 8%, or $104,000, sourcing transaction fee. In addition, we will pay Lambda Investors legal fees and other expenses incurred in connection with the note in the amount of $50,000 as well as Lambda Investors legal fees and other expenses incurred in connection with the rights offering in the amount of $50,000. Those payments will be paid upon the completion of the rights offering or, if earlier, upon the maturity of the note. As additional consideration, we agreed to extend by 1 year the expiration date of all of Lambda outstanding warrants to March 2017. In addition, we have undertaken to conduct a $3 million rights offering of common stock. We expect the offering price will be $0.60 per share. All of our stockholders and warrantholders will be eligible to participate in the offering on a pro rata basis based upon their proportionate ownership of our common stock on a fully diluted basis. Subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions including compliance with all obligations under the note, security agreement and the other transaction documents relating to the note and no material adverse change having occurred with respect to the business, assets, and financial condition of the Company, Lambda Investors has advised us that it intends to exercise its basic subscription privilege in full and to purchase any shares of common stock that are not subscribed for by our other stockholders in the rights offering, if any. During the period when the rights offering is open, we expect to offer to our public warrantholders holding the warrants issued at the close of the March 2011 rights offering a 1 time right, at their option, to exercise such warrants for an exercise price of $0.30 per share discounted from $0.40 per share. We expect to commence the offering in March 2013 following the filing of our Annual Report on Form 10 K. In connection with the offering, we will file a registration statement on Form S 1, as may be amended, with the Securities and Exchange Commission. There can be no assurance that our future cash flow will be sufficient to meet our obligations and commitments. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our commitments, we will be required to adopt alternatives, such as seeking to raise debt or equity capital, curtailing its planned activities or ceasing its operations. There can be no assurance that any such actions could be effected on a timely basis or on satisfactory terms or at all, or that these actions would enable us to continue to satisfy its capital requirements. Recent Developments On April 23, 2012 we entered into a strategic license and supply agreement with Medica for ultrafiltration products granting us global rights, with specific exceptions, to market products based on Medica proprietary Medisulf1 ultrafiltration technology. Under the terms of the agreement, Medica will provide an exclusive license to us for its ultrafiltration technology for the period April 23, 2012 to December 31, 2022 In exchange for the license, we paid Medica 1,100,000 in 2 installments 500,000 on April 23, 2012 and 600,000 on February 4, 2013 The remaining 400,000 is to be paid by June 30, 2013 As part of the agreement, we have granted to Medica 300,000 options to purchase our common stock which will vest over the first 3 years of the agreement. For the period April 23, 2014 through December 31, 2022, we will pay Medica a royalty of 3% of net sales of filtration products related to the licensed technology. 6 Manufacturing and Suppliers We do not, and do not intend to in the near future, manufacture any of our products and comp1nts. With regard to the OLp r MD190 and MD220, on June 27, 2011, we entered into a license agreement, effective July 1, 2011, with Bellco S.r.l., an Italy based supplier of hemodialysis and intensive care products, for the manufacturing, marketing and sale of our patented mid dilution dialysis filters (MD190, MD220), referred to herein as the Products. Under the agreement, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell the Products under its own name, label and CE mark in Italy, France, Belgium, Spain and Canada on an exclusive basis, and to do the same on a non exclusive basis in the United Kingdom and Greece and, upon our written approval, other European countries where we do not sell the Products as well as non European countries, all such countries herein referred to as the Territory. In exchange for the rights granted to it under the Bellco license agreement through December 31, 2014, Bellco agreed to pay us installment payments of 500,000, 750,000, 600,000 on July 1, 2011, January 15, 2012 and January 15, 2013, respectively, and all 3 payments have been received. Such installment payments, herein referred to as the Installment Payments, are Bellco sole financial obligations through December 31, 2014. Beginning on January 1, 2015 through and including December 31, 2016, Bellco will pay to us a royalty based on the number of units of Products sold per year in the Territory as follows for the first 103,000 units sold, Bellco will pay 4.50 per unit; thereafter, Bellco will pay 4.00 per unit. Bellco must meet minimum sales targets of 15,000 units in each quarter of 2015 and 2016. If Bellco fails to meet a quarterly minimum, the license in Italy, France, Belgium, Spain and Canada will, at our discretion, convert to a non exclusive 1 All sums payable under the agreement will be paid in Euros, as adjusted to account for currency exchange fluctuations between the Euro and the U.S. dollar that occur between July 1, 2011, the effective date of the agreement, and the date of payment. Sales and Marketing Under the Bellco license agreement, as discussed above, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell the Products under its own name, label and CE mark in the Territory. In addition, if requested by us, Bellco will be required to sell the Products to our distributors in the Territory. Our New Jersey office oversees global sales and marketing activity of our water filter products. We are in discussions with several medical products and filtration products suppliers to act as non exclusive distributors of our water filter products to medical institutions. In May 2012 we signed a non exclusive U.S. distributor agreement with Vantage. In July 2012 we signed non exclusive U.S. distributor agreements with TQM, Ameriwater and OLS. For each prospective market for our water filter products, we are pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and distribution. Our water filter manufacturer in Europe shares certain intellectual property rights with us for 1 of our Dual Stage Ultrafilter (DSU) designs. Research and Development Our research and development efforts continue on several fronts directly related to our current product lines. We are also working on additional machine devices, next generation user interface enhancements and other product enhancements. We were awarded research contracts from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) for development of a potable dual stage military water purifying filter. The initial research contract was awarded in 2006 for approximately $1 million and work was completed in August 2009. The second research contract was awarded in August 2009 and was an expansion of the 2006 ONR contract which is being performed as part of the Marine Corps Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) project. The primary objective of this expanded research program is to select concepts and functional prototype filter pump units which were developed during the first phase of the project, and further develop them into smaller field testable devices that can be used for military evaluation purposes. An advantage of our ultrafilter is the removal of viruses which are not removed with commercially available off the shelf microfilter devices. Such devices generally rely on a secondary chemical disinfection step to make the water safe to drink. The expanded contract also includes research geared toward improving membrane performance, improving device durability, developing larger squad level water purifier devices, and investigating desalination filter pump devices for emergency use purposes. Approximately $317,000 and $463,000 has been billed to the projects during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Approximately $900,000 of revenue has been recognized on the initial research contract which concluded in August 2009. Approximately $1,800,000 has been recognized on the second research contract awarded in August 2009. This research contract project ended in March 2012 In March 2010, we entered into a development agreement with STERIS Corporation to jointly develop filtration based products for medical device applications. We received an initial payment upon entering into the agreement of $40,000 and were eligible to receive additional payments upon successful completion of product development milest1s. During 2010, we completed the initial milest1 under the joint collaboration agreement with STERIS Corporation and further milest1s under the agreement during the first 3 quarters of 2011 Completion of these milest1s resulted in aggregate payments to us of $100,000 during 2010, of which approximately $67,000 was recognized in 2010 and approximately $33,000 was recognized in 2011 The remaining milest1s, when completed, will result in additional payments of $60,000. 7 Major Customers For the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, four customers accounted for 79% and 83%, respectively, of the Company sales. In addition, as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, those four customers accounted for 88% and 89%, respectively, of the Company accounts receivable Competition With respect to the water filtration market, we expect to compete with companies that are well entrenched in the water filtration domain. These companies include Pall Corporation, which manufactures end point water filtration systems, as well as 3M and Siemens. Our methods of competition in the water filtration domain include developing and marketing products that are designed to meet critical and specific customer needs more effectively than competitive devices; offering unique attributes that illustrate our product reliability, user friendliness, and performance capabilities; selling products to specific customer groups where our unique product attributes are mission critical; and pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and distribution. The dialyzer and renal replacement therapy market is subject to intense competition. Accordingly, our future success will depend on our ability to meet the clinical needs of physicians and nephrologists, improve patient outcomes and remain cost effective for payers. We compete with other suppliers of ESRD therapies, supplies and services. These suppliers include Fresenius Medical Care AG, and Gambro AB, currently 2 of the primary machine manufacturers in hemodialysis. At present, Fresenius Medical Care AG and Gambro AB also manufacture HDF machines. The markets in which we sell our dialysis products are highly competitive. Our competitors in the sale of hemodialysis products include Gambro AB, Baxter International Inc., Fresenius Medical Care AG, Asahi Kasei Medical Co. Ltd., B. Braun Melsungen AG, Nipro Medical Corporation Ltd., Nikkiso Co., Ltd., Terumo Medical Corporation and Toray Medical Co., Ltd. Other competitive considerations include pharmacological and technological advances in preventing the progression of ESRD in high risk patients such as those with diabetes and hypertension, technological developments by others in the area of dialysis, the development of new medications designed to reduce the incidence of kidney transplant rejection and progress in using kidneys harvested from genetically engineered animals as a source of transplants. We are not aware of any other companies using technology similar to ours in the treatment of ESRD. Our competition would increase, however, if companies that currently sell ESRD products, or new companies that enter the market, develop technology that is more efficient than ours. We believe that in order to become competitive in this market, we will need to develop and maintain competitive products and take and hold sufficient market share from our competitors. Therefore, we expect our methods of competing in the ESRD marketplace to include continuing our efforts to develop, have manufactured and sell products which, when compared to existing products, perform more efficiently and are available at prices that are acceptable to the market; displaying our products and providing associated literature at major industry trade shows in the United States; initiating discussions with dialysis clinic medical directors, as well as representatives of dialysis clinical chains, to develop interest in our products; pursuing alliance opportunities in certain territories for distribution of our products and possible alternative manufacturing facilities; and entering into license agreements similar to the Bellco S.r.l. agreement to expand market share. 8 Intellectual Property Patents We protect our technology and products through patents and patent applications. In addition to the United States, we also applied for patents in other jurisdictions, such as the European Patent Office, Canada and Japan, to the extent we deem appropriate. We have built a portfolio of patents and applications covering our products, including their hardware design and methods of hemodiafiltration. We believe that our patent strategy will provide a competitive advantage in our target markets, but our patents may not be broad enough to cover our competitors products and may be subject to invalidation claims. Our U.S. patents for the Method and Apparatus for Efficient Hemodiafiltration and for the Dual Stage Filtration Cartridge, have claims that cover the OLpur MDHDF filter series and the method of hemodiafiltration employed in the operation of the products. Technological developments in ESRD therapy could reduce the value of our intellectual property. Any such reduction could be rapid and unanticipated. We have issued patents on our water filtration products and applications in process to cover various applications in residential, commercial, and remote environments. As of December 31, 2012, we have eighteen issued U.S. patents; 1 issued Eurasian patent; seven Mexican patents, four South Korean patents, 3 Russian patents, six Chinese patents, nine French patents, nine German patents, five Israeli patents, seven Italian patents, 3 Spanish patents, nine United Kingdom patents, fourteen Japanese patents, 3 Hong Kong patents, nine Canadian patents, 1 Australian patent, 2 patents in Brazil, 1 patent in Sweden and 1 patent in Netherlands. Our issued U.S. patents expire between 2018 and 2027. In addition, we have 3 pending U.S. patent applications, four pending patent applications in Canada, five pending patent applications in the European Patent Office, 2 pending patent applications in Brazil, 1 pending patent application in China, four pending patent applications in Israel, 2 pending patent applications in India and 1 pending patent application in South Korea. Our pending patent applications relate to a range of dialysis technologies, including cartridge configurations, cartridge assembly, substitution fluid systems, and methods to enhance toxin removal. Trademarks As of December 31, 2012, we secured registrations of the trademarks CENTRAPUR, H2H, OLpur and the Arrows Logo in the European Union. Applications for these trademarks are pending registration in the United States. We also have applications for registration of a number of other marks pending in the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Governmental Regulation The research and development, manufacturing, promotion, marketing and distribution of our ESRD therapy products in the United States, Europe and other regions of the world are subject to regulation by numerous governmental authorities, including the FDA, the European Union and analogous agencies. United States The FDA regulates the manufacture and distribution of medical devices in the United States pursuant to the FDC Act. All of our ESRD therapy products are regulated in the United States as medical devices by the FDA under the FDC Act. Under the FDC Act, medical devices are classified in 1 of 3 classes, namely Class I, II or III, on the basis of the controls deemed necessary by the FDA to reasonably ensure their safety and effectiveness. Class I devices are medical devices for which general controls are deemed sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness. General controls include provisions related to (1) labeling, (2) producer registration, (3) defect notification, (4) records and reports and (5) quality service requirements, or QSR. Class II devices are medical devices for which the general controls for the Class I devices are deemed not sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness and require special controls in addition to the general controls. Special controls include provisions related to (1) performance and design standards, (2) post market surveillance, (3) patient registries and (4) the use of FDA guidelines. Class III devices are the most regulated medical devices and are generally limited to devices that support or sustain human life or are of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health or present a potential, unreasonable risk of illness or injury. Pre market approval by the FDA is the required process of scientific review to ensure the safety and effectiveness of Class III devices. Before a new medical device can be introduced to the market, FDA clearance of a pre market notification under Section 510(k) of the FDC Act or FDA clearance of a pre market approval, or PMA, application under Section 515 of the FDC Act must be obtained. A Section 510(k) clearance will be granted if the submitted information establishes that the proposed device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed Class I or Class II medical device or to a Class III medical device for which the FDA has not called for pre market approval under Section 515. The Section 510(k) pre market clearance process is generally faster and simpler than the Section 515 pre market approval process. 9 For any devices cleared through the Section 510(k) process, modifications or enhancements that could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device or that constitute a major change to the intended use of the device will require a new Section 510(k) pre market notification submission. Accordingly, if we do obtain Section 510(k) pre market clearance for any of our ESRD therapy and DSU products, we will need to submit another Section 510(k) pre market notification if we significantly affect that product safety or effectiveness through subsequent modifications or enhancements. On July 1, 2009, we received FDA clearance of the DSU to be used to filter biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate used in hemodialysis procedures. On June 30, 2010, we received a final decision letter from the FDA for our 510(k) submission which stated that the FDA could not reach a substantial equivalence determination for our hemodiafiltration (HDF) system. On August 11, 2011, Nephros filed a new 510(k) application with the FDA for clearance of the Company hemodiafiltration (HDF) system for end stage renal disease. On April 30, 2012, the Company announced that it received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market the OLp r H2H Module and OLp r MD 220 Hemodiafilter for use with a UF controlled hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of patients with chronic renal failure in the United States. The FDC Act requires that medical devices be manufactured in accordance with the FDA current QSR regulations which require, among other things, that the design and manufacturing processes be regulated and controlled by the use of written procedures; the ability to produce medical devices which meet the manufacturer specifications be validated by extensive and detailed testing of every aspect of the process; any deficiencies in the manufacturing process or in the products produced be investigated; detailed records be kept and a corrective and preventative action plan be in place; and manufacturing facilities be subject to FDA inspection on a periodic basis to monitor compliance with QSR regulations. If violations of the applicable QSR regulations are noted during FDA inspections of our manufacturing facilities or the manufacturing facilities of our contract manufacturers, there may be a material adverse effect on our ability to produce and sell our products. In addition to the requirements described above, the FDC Act requires that all medical device manufacturers and distributors register with the FDA annually and provide the FDA with a list of those medical devices which they distribute commercially; information be provided to the FDA on death or serious injuries alleged to have been associated with the use of the products, as well as product malfunctions that would likely cause or contribute to death or serious injury if the malfunction were to recur; and certain medical devices not cleared with the FDA for marketing in the United States meet specific requirements before they are exported. European Union The European Union began to harmonize national regulations comprehensively for the control of medical devices in member nations in 1993, when it adopted its Medical Devices Directive 93 42 EEC. The European Union directive applies to both the manufacturer quality assurance system and the product technical design and discusses the various ways to obtain approval of a device (dependent on device classification), how to properly CE Mark a device and how to place a device on the market. The regulatory approach necessary to demonstrate to the European Union that the organization has the ability to provide medical devices and related services that consistently meet customer requirements and regulatory requirements applicable to medical devices requires the certification of a full quality management system by a notified body. Initially, we engaged T V Rheinland of North America, Inc. ( T V Rheinland ) as the notified body to assist us in obtaining certification to the International Organization for Standardization, or ISO, 13485 2003 standard, which demonstrates the presence of a quality management system that can be used by an organization for design and development, production, installation and servicing of medical devices and the design, development and provision of related services. 10 European Union requirements for products are set forth in harmonized European Union standards and include conformity to safety requirements, physical and biological properties, construction and environmental properties, and information supplied by the manufacturer. A company demonstrates conformity to these requirements, with respect to a product, by pre clinical tests, biocompatibility tests, qualification of products and packaging, risk analysis and well conducted clinical investigations approved by ethics committees. Once a manufacturer full quality management system is determined to be in compliance with ISO 13485 2003 and other statutory requirements, and the manufacturer products conform to harmonized European standards, the notified body will recommend and document such conformity. The manufacturer will receive a CE marking and ISO certifications, and then may place a CE mark on the relevant products. The CE mark, which stands for Conformit Europ enne, demonstrates compliance with the relevant European Union requirements. Products subject to these provisions that do not bear the CE mark cannot be imported to, or sold or distributed within, the European Union. In July 2003, we received a certification from T V Rheinland that our quality management system conforms to the requirements of the European Community. At the same time, T V Rheinland approved our use of the CE marking with respect to the design and production of high permeability hemodialyzer products for ESRD therapy. In April 2010, we changed our notified body from T V Rheinland to BSI America, Inc. and expanded our scope to include design and development and production of water filters. Under the Bellco license agreement, as discussed above, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell the Products under its own name, label and CE mark in the Territory. In addition, if requested by us, Bellco will be required to sell the Products to our distributors in the Territory. Regulatory Authorities in Regions Outside of the United States and the European Union We also plan to sell our ESRD therapy products in foreign markets outside the United States which are not part of the European Union. Requirements pertaining to medical devices vary widely from country to country, ranging from no health regulations to detailed submissions such as those required by the FDA. We believe the extent and complexity of regulations for medical devices such as those produced by us are increasing worldwide. We anticipate that this trend will continue and that the cost and time required to obtain approval to market in any given country will increase, with no assurance that such approval will be obtained. Our ability to export into other countries may require compliance with ISO 13485, which is analogous to compliance with the FDA QSR requirements. In November 2007 and May 2011, the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada, the Canadian health regulatory agency, approved our OLpur MD220 Hemodiafilter and our DSU, respectively for marketing in Canada. Other than the CE marking and Canadian approval of our OLpur MD220 Hemodiafilter and DSU products, we have not obtained any regulatory approvals to sell any of our products and there is no assurance that any such clearance or certification will be issued. Reimbursement In both domestic markets and markets outside of the United States, sales of our ESRD therapy products will depend in part, on the availability of reimbursement from third party payers. In the United States, ESRD providers are reimbursed through Medicare, Medicaid and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, ESRD providers are also reimbursed through governmental and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, the pricing and profitability of our products generally will be subject to government controls. Despite the continually expanding influence of the European Union, national healthcare systems in its member nations, reimbursement decision making included, are neither regulated nor integrated at the European Union level. Each country has its own system, often closely protected by its corresponding national government. Product Liability and Insurance The production, marketing and sale of kidney dialysis products have an inherent risk of liability in the event of product failure or claim of harm caused by product operation. We have acquired product liability insurance for our products in the amount of $5 million. A successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage could materially deplete our assets. Moreover, any claim against us could generate negative publicity, which could decrease the demand for our products, our ability to generate revenues and our profitability. Some of our existing and potential agreements with manufacturers of our products and comp1nts of our products do or may require us (1) to obtain product liability insurance or (2) to indemnify manufacturers against liabilities resulting from the sale of our products. If we are not able to maintain adequate product liability insurance, we will be in breach of these agreements, which could materially adversely affect our ability to produce our products. Even if we are able to obtain and maintain product liability insurance, if a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage is made, then we may have to indemnify some or all of our manufacturers for their losses, which could materially deplete our assets. 11 Employees As of December 31, 2012, we employed a total of 10 employees, 6 of whom were full time and 1 who is employed on a part time basis. We also have engaged 2 consultants on an ongoing basis. Of the 12 total employees and consultants, 4 are employed in a sales marketing customer support capacity, 4 in general and administrative and 4 in research and development. Available Information We make available free of charge on our website ( http www.nephros.com ) our annual report on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q, current reports on Form 8 K, and all amendments to those reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. We provide electronic or paper copies of filings free of charge upon request. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that file with the SEC at http www.sec.gov . 12 Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Company Our independent registered public accounting firm, in its audit report related to our financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012, expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our independent registered public accounting firm has included an explanatory paragraph in its report on our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K for the year ended December 31, 2012 expressing doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. Our recurring losses and difficulty in generating sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations and sustain our operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, and our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Based on our current cash flow projections, we will need to raise additional funds through either the licensing or sale of our technologies or the additional public or private offerings of our securities. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to obtain further financing, or do so on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional funds on a timely basis, or at all, we would be materially adversely affected. If we do not receive capital from the rights offering or from another source, we may be forced to cease operations. We are in immediate need of capital. We expect that the $13 million in proceeds from the senior secured note issued to Lambda Investors LLC will allow us to fund our operations through May 2013 If we do not successfully complete a rights offering by May 2013, we expect that we will not have sufficient resources to fund our operations and may be required to cease and wind down operations unless we can find another source of financing at such time, which we believe would be difficult and may not be possible on acceptable terms or at all. Our secured note with Lambda Investors LLC affects our business operations and contains provisions which restrict our ability to execute certain strategic transactions On February 4, 2013, we issued a senior secured note to Lambda Investors LLC in the principal amount of $13 million. We expect that the proceeds from the note will allow us to fund our operations through May 2013 The note bears interest at the rate of 12% per annum and matures on August 4, 2013, at which time all principal and accrued interest will be due. If we do not pay principal and interest under the note when due, the interest rate increases to 16% per annum. The note is secured by a first priority lien on all of our property, including our intellectual property. In the event of a default, our outstanding indebtedness could become immediately due and payable and, if outstanding indebtedness is not immediately satisfied from cash resources, Lambda could realize on the collateral to secure such indebtedness. Currently, we do not have sufficient cash to satisfy the indebtedness. As long as indebtedness remains outstanding under the senior secured note with Lambda Investors LLC, we will be subject to certain covenants which, among other Item, restrict our ability to merge with another company, sell a material amount of our assets, incur any additional indebtedness, repay any existing indebtedness, or declare or pay any dividends in cash, property or securities. These restrictions significantly impact our future alternatives to enter into strategic transactions and limit our ability to obtain additional or other financing because our assets have been pledged as collateral for repayment of our indebtedness. We have agreed to prepay amounts due under the note with the cash proceeds from (a) a rights offering and an offering of a discounted exercise price to public warrantholders, each as further described in the note, (b) any other equity or debt financing, or (c) the issuance or incurrence of any other indebtedness or the sale of any assets outside the ordinary course of business, in each case prior to the maturity date. In addition, the net proceeds of any offering, financing, asset disposition or other external liquidity generating transaction would need to be first applied to our existing indebtedness which, while reducing our level of indebtedness, cannot be assured to be sufficient for our continuing cash requirements and cash needs. In the event that we default under the senior secured note or we are unable to repay the indebtedness when it becomes due, Lambda could foreclose on all of our property and assets. If this were to occur, our stockholders could lose all or a portion of their investment in the Company. 13 We have a history of operating losses and a significant accumulated deficit, and we may not achieve or maintain profitability in the future. We have not been profitable since our inception in 1997. As of December 31, 2012, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $97,530,000, primarily as a result of historical operating losses. We expect to continue to incur additional losses for the foreseeable future as a result of a high level of operating expenses, significant up front expenditures, including the cost of clinical trials, production and marketing activities and very limited revenue from the sale of our products. We began sales of our first product in March 2004, and we may never realize sufficient revenues from the sale of our products or be profitable. Each of the following factors, among others, may influence the timing and extent of our profitability, if any the market acceptance of our technologies and products in each of our target markets; our ability to effectively and efficiently manufacture, market and distribute our products; our ability to sell our products at competitive prices which exceed our per unit costs; and our ability to continue to develop products and maintain a competitive advantage in our industry. We face significant challenges in obtaining market acceptance of our products, which could adversely affect our potential sales and revenues. Our products are new to the market, and we do not yet have an established market or customer base for our products. Acceptance of our products in the marketplace by both potential users, including chronic renal failure patients, and potential purchasers, including nephrologists, dialysis clinics and other health care providers, is uncertain, and our failure to achieve sufficient market acceptance will significantly limit our ability to generate revenue and be profitable. Market acceptance will require substantial marketing efforts and the expenditure of significant funds by us to inform dialysis patients and nephrologists, dialysis clinics and other health care providers of the benefits of using our products. We may encounter significant clinical and market resistance to our products and our products may never achieve market acceptance. We may not be able to build key relationships with physicians, clinical groups and government agencies, pursue or increase sales opportunities in Europe or elsewhere, or be the first to introduce hemodiafiltration therapy in the United States. Product orders may be cancelled, patients or customers currently using our products may cease to do so and patients or customers expected to begin using our products may not. Factors that may affect our ability to achieve acceptance of our chronic renal failure therapy products in the marketplace include whether such products will be safe for use; such products will be effective; such products will be cost effective; we will be able to demonstrate product safety, efficacy and cost effectiveness; there are unexpected side effects, complications or other safety issues associated with such products; and government or third party reimbursement for the cost of such products is available at reasonable rates, if at all. Acceptance of our water filtration products in the marketplace is also uncertain, and our failure to achieve sufficient market acceptance and sell such products at competitive prices will limit our ability to generate revenue and be profitable. Our water filtration products and technologies may not achieve expected reliability, performance and endurance standards. Our water filtration products and technology may not achieve market acceptance, including among hospitals, or may not be deemed suitable for other commercial, military, industrial or retail applications. Many of the same factors that may affect our ability to achieve acceptance of our chronic renal failure therapy products in the marketplace will also apply to our water filtration products, except for those related to side effects, clinical trials and third party reimbursement. If we are not able to successfully scale up production of our products, then our sales and revenues will suffer. In order to commercialize our products, we need to be able to produce them in a cost effective way on a large scale to meet commercial demand, while maintaining extremely high standards for quality and reliability. If we fail to successfully commercialize our products, then we will not be profitable. We expect to rely on a limited number of independent manufacturers to produce our products. Our manufacturers systems and procedures may not be adequate to support our operations and may not be able to achieve the rapid execution necessary to exploit the market for our products. Our manufacturers could experience manufacturing and control problems as they begin to scale up our future manufacturing operations, if any, and we may not be able to scale up manufacturing in a timely manner or at a commercially reasonable cost to enable production in sufficient quantities. If we experience any of these problems with respect to our manufacturers initial or future scale ups of manufacturing operations, then we may not be able to have our products manufactured and delivered in a timely manner. Our products are new and evolving, and our manufacturers may encounter unforeseen difficulties in manufacturing them in commercial quantities or at all. If we cannot develop adequate distribution, customer service and technical support ne2rks, then we may not be able to market and distribute our products effectively and or customers may decide not to order our products and, in either case, our sales and revenues will suffer. Our strategy requires us to distribute our products and provide a significant amount of customer service and maintenance and other technical service. To provide these services, we have begun, and will need to continue, to develop a ne2rk of distribution and a staff of employees and independent contractors in each of the areas in which we intend to operate. We cannot assure that we will be able to organize and manage this ne2rk on a cost effective basis. If we cannot effectively organize and manage this ne2rk, then it may be difficult for us to distribute our products and to provide competitive service and support to our customers, in which case customers may be unable, or decide not, to order our products and our sales and revenues will suffer. 14 We have limited experience selling our products to healthcare facilities, and we might be unsuccessful in increasing our sales. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to sell our products to hospitals and other healthcare facilities that include dialysis clinics. We have limited experience with respect to sales and marketing. If we are unsuccessful at manufacturing, marketing and selling our products, our operations and potential revenues will be materially adversely affected. We cannot sell our products, including certain modifications thereto, until we obtain the requisite regulatory approvals and clearances in the countries in which we intend to sell our products. If we fail to receive, or experience a significant delay in receiving, such approvals and clearances, then we may not be able to get our products to market and enhance our revenues. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to get our products into the market as quickly as possible. We have obtained a Conformit Europ ene, or CE, mark, which demonstrates compliance with the relevant European Union requirements and is a regulatory prerequisite for selling our products in the European Union and certain other countries that recognize CE marking (collectively, European Community ), for our OLpur mid dilution hemodiafilter series product and our Dual Stage Ultrafilter ( DSU ). We have not yet obtained the CE mark for any of our other products. Recently, we received clearance from the FDA to market our OLp r MD220 Hemodiafilter and OLp r H2H Module for use with a hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of chronic renal failure patients. We have not yet begun to market these products in the U.S. There is no assurance that any existing products that have not yet been approved, or any new products developed by us in the future, will be approved for marketing. The clearance and or approval processes can be lengthy and uncertain and each requires substantial commitments of our financial resources and our management time and effort. We may not be able to obtain further CE marking or regulatory approval for any of our existing or new products in a timely manner or at all. Even if we do obtain regulatory approval, approval may be only for limited uses with specific classes of patients, processes or other devices. Our failure to obtain, or delays in obtaining, the necessary regulatory clearance and or approvals would prevent us from selling our affected products in the applicable regions. If we cannot sell some of our products in such regions, or if we are delayed in selling while waiting for the necessary clearance and or approvals, our ability to generate revenues from these products will be limited. We intend to market our products globally. Requirements pertaining to the sale of our products vary widely from country to country. It may be very expensive and difficult for us to meet the requirements for the sale of our products in many countries. As a result, we may not be able to obtain the required approvals in a timely manner, if at all. If we cannot sell our products in a particular region, then the size of our potential market could be reduced, which would limit our potential sales and revenues. Clinical studies that may be required for our products are costly and time consuming, and their outcome is uncertain. Before obtaining regulatory approvals for the commercial sale of any of our products, other than those for which we have already received marketing approval in the United States and elsewhere, we must demonstrate through clinical studies that our products are safe and effective. For products other than those for which we have already received marketing approval, if we do not prove in clinical trials that our products are safe and effective, we will not obtain marketing approvals from the applicable regulatory authorities. In particular, 1 or more of our products may not exhibit the expected medical benefits, may cause harmful side effects, may not be effective in treating dialysis patients or may have other unexpected characteristics that preclude regulatory approval for any or all indications of use or limit commercial use if approved. The length of time necessary to complete clinical trials varies significantly and is difficult to predict. Factors that can cause delay or termination of our clinical trials include slower than expected patient enrollment due to the nature of the protocol, the proximity of subjects to clinical sites, the eligibility criteria for the study, competition with clinical trials for similar devices or other factors; lower than expected retention rates of subjects in a clinical trial; inadequately trained or insufficient personnel at the study site to assist in overseeing and monitoring clinical trials; delays in approvals from a study site review board, or other required approvals; longer treatment time required to demonstrate effectiveness; lack of sufficient supplies of the product; adverse medical events or side effects in treated subjects; and lack of effectiveness of the product being tested. 15 Even if we obtain positive results from clinical studies for our products, we may not achieve the same success in future studies of such products. Data obtained from clinical studies are susceptible to varying interpretations that could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval. In addition, we may encounter delays or rejections based upon changes in regulatory policy for device approval during the period of product development and regulatory review of each submitted new device application. Moreover, regulatory approval may entail limitations on the indicated uses of the device. Failure to obtain requisite governmental approvals or failure to obtain approvals of the scope requested will delay or preclude our licensees or marketing partners from marketing our products or limit the commercial use of such products and will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, some or all of the clinical trials we undertake may not demonstrate sufficient safety and efficacy to obtain the requisite regulatory approvals, which could prevent or delay the creation of marketable products. Our product development costs will increase if we have delays in testing or approvals, if we need to perform more, larger or different clinical trials than planned or if our trials are not successful. Delays in our clinical trials may harm our financial results and the commercial prospects for our products. Additionally, we may be unable to complete our clinical trials if we are unable to obtain additional capital. We may be required to design and conduct additional clinical trials. We may be required to design and conduct additional clinical trials to further demonstrate the safety and efficacy of our products, which may result in significant expense and delay. Regulatory agencies may require new or additional clinical trials because of inconclusive results from current or earlier clinical trials, a possible failure to conduct clinical trials in complete adherence to certain regulatory standards, the identification of new clinical trial endpoints, or the need for additional data regarding the safety or efficacy of our products. It is possible that regulatory authorities may not ultimately approve our products for commercial sale in any jurisdiction, even if we believe future clinical results are positive. We cannot assure you that our medically approved products will be safe and we are required under applicable law to report any product related deaths or serious injuries or product malfunctions that could result in deaths or serious injuries, and such reports could trigger recalls, class action lawsuits and other events that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from such products. We cannot assure you that our medically approved products will be safe. Under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDC Act), we are required to submit medical device reports, or MDRs, to the FDA to report device related deaths, serious injuries and product malfunctions that could result in death or serious injury if they were to recur. Depending on their significance, MDRs could trigger events that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from such products, such as the following information contained in the MDRs could trigger FDA regulatory actions such as inspections, recalls and patient physician notifications; because the reports are publicly available, MDRs could become the basis for private lawsuits, including class actions; and if we fail to submit a required MDR to the FDA, the FDA could take enforcement action against us. If any of these events occur, then we could incur significant expenses and it could become more difficult for us to gain market acceptance of our medically approved products and to generate revenues from sales. Other countries may impose analogous reporting requirements that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from sales of our medically approved products. Product liability associated with the production, marketing and sale of our products, and or the expense of defending against claims of product liability, could materially deplete our assets and generate negative publicity which could impair our reputation. The production, marketing and sale of kidney dialysis and water filtration products have inherent risks of liability in the event of product failure or claim of harm caused by product operation. Furthermore, even meritless claims of product liability may be costly to defend against. Although we have acquired product liability insurance for our products, we may not be able to maintain or obtain this insurance on acceptable terms or at all. Because we may not be able to obtain insurance that provides us with adequate protection against all potential product liability claims, a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage could materially deplete our assets. Moreover, even if we are able to obtain adequate insurance, any claim against us could generate negative publicity, which could impair our reputation and adversely affect the demand for our products, our ability to generate sales and our profitability. Some of the agreements that we may enter into with manufacturers of our products and comp1nts of our products may require us to obtain product liability insurance; or to indemnify manufacturers against liabilities resulting from the sale of our products. 16 For example, the agreement with our contract manufacturer, or CM, requires that we obtain and maintain certain minimum product liability insurance coverage and that we indemnify our CM against certain liabilities arising out of our products that they manufacture, provided they do not arise out of our CM breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct. If we are not able to obtain and maintain adequate product liability insurance, then we could be in breach of these agreements, which could materially adversely affect our ability to produce our products and generate revenues. Even if we are able to obtain and maintain product liability insurance, if a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage is made, then we may have to indemnify some or all of our manufacturers for their losses, which could materially deplete our assets. If we violate any provisions of the FDC Act or any other statutes or regulations, then we could be subject to enforcement actions by the FDA or other governmental agencies. We face a significant compliance burden under the FDC Act and other applicable statutes and regulations which govern the testing, labeling, storage, record keeping, distribution, sale, marketing, advertising and promotion of our medically approved products. If we violate the FDC Act or other regulatory requirements at any time during or after the product development and or approval process, we could be subject to enforcement actions by the FDA or other agencies, including fines; injunctions; civil penalties; recalls or seizures of products; total or partial suspension of the production of our products; withdrawal of any existing approvals or pre market clearances of our products; refusal to approve or clear new applications or notices relating to our products; recommendations that we not be allowed to enter into government contracts; and criminal prosecution. Any of the above could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Significant additional governmental regulation could subject us to unanticipated delays which would adversely affect our sales and revenues. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to get our products into the market as quickly as possible. Additional laws and regulations, or changes to existing laws and regulations that are applicable to our business may be enacted or promulgated, and the interpretation, application or enforcement of the existing laws and regulations may change. We cannot predict the nature of any future laws, regulations, interpretations, applications or enforcements or the specific effects any of these might have on our business. Any future laws, regulations, interpretations, applications or enforcements could delay or prevent regulatory approval or clearance of our products and our ability to market our products. Moreover, changes that result in our failure to comply with the requirements of applicable laws and regulations could result in the types of enforcement actions by the FDA and or other agencies as described above, all of which could impair our ability to have manufactured and to sell the affected products. Protecting our intellectual property in our technology through patents may be costly and ineffective. If we are not able to adequately secure or enforce protection of our intellectual property, then we may not be able to compete effectively and we may not be profitable. Our future success depends in part on our ability to protect the intellectual property for our technology through patents. We will only be able to protect our products and methods from unauthorized use by third parties to the extent that our products and methods are covered by valid and enforceable patents or are effectively maintained as trade secrets. Our 16 granted U.S. patents will expire at various times from 2018 to 2026, assuming they are properly maintained. The protection provided by our patents, and patent applications if issued, may not be broad enough to prevent competitors from introducing similar products into the market. Our patents, if challenged or if we attempt to enforce them, may not necessarily be upheld by the courts of any jurisdiction. Numerous publications may have been disclosed by, and numerous patents may have been issued to, our competitors and others relating to methods and devices for dialysis of which we are not aware and additional patents relating to methods and devices for dialysis may be issued to our competitors and others in the future. If any of those publications or patents conflict with our patent rights, or cover our products, then any or all of our patent applications could be rejected and any or all of our granted patents could be invalidated, either of which could materially adversely affect our competitive position. 17 Litigation and other proceedings relating to patent matters, whether initiated by us or a third party, can be expensive and time consuming, regardless of whether the outcome is favorable to us, and may require the diversion of substantial financial, managerial and other resources. An adverse outcome could subject us to significant liabilities to third parties or require us to cease any related development, product sales or commercialization activities. In addition, if patents that contain dominating or conflicting claims have been or are subsequently issued to others and the claims of these patents are ultimately determined to be valid, then we may be required to obtain licenses under patents of others in order to develop, manufacture, use, import and or sell our products. We may not be able to obtain licenses under any of these patents on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we do not obtain these licenses, we could encounter delays in, or be prevented entirely from using, importing, developing, manufacturing, offering or selling any products or practicing any methods, or delivering any services requiring such licenses. If we file patent applications or obtain patents in foreign countries, we will be subject to laws and procedures that differ from those in the United States. Such differences could create additional uncertainty about the level and extent of our patent protection. Moreover, patent protection in foreign countries may be different from patent protection under U.S. laws and may not be as favorable to us. Many non U.S. jurisdictions, for example, prohibit patent claims covering methods of medical treatment of humans, although this prohibition may not include devices used for such treatment. If we are not able to secure and enforce protection of our trade secrets through enforcement of our confidentiality and non competition agreements, then our competitors may gain access to our trade secrets, we may not be able to compete effectively and we may not be profitable. Such protection may be costly and ineffective. We attempt to protect our trade secrets, including the processes, concepts, ideas and documentation associated with our technologies, through the use of confidentiality agreements and non competition agreements with our current employees and with other parties to whom we have divulged such trade secrets. If these employees or other parties breach our confidentiality agreements and non competition agreements, or if these agreements are not sufficient to protect our technology or are found to be unenforceable, then our competitors could acquire and use information that we consider to be our trade secrets and we may not be able to compete effectively. Policing unauthorized use of our trade secrets is difficult and expensive, particularly because of the global nature of our operations. The laws of other countries may not adequately protect our trade secrets. If we are not able to maintain sufficient quality controls, then the approval or clearance of our products by the European Union, the FDA or other relevant authorities could be withdrawn, delayed or denied and our sales and revenues will suffer. Approval or clearance of our products could be withdrawn, delayed or denied by the European Union, the FDA and the relevant authorities of other countries if our manufacturing facilities do not comply with their respective manufacturing requirements. The European Union imposes requirements on quality control systems of manufacturers, which are inspected and certified on a periodic basis and may be subject to additional unannounced inspections. Failure by our manufacturers to comply with these requirements could prevent us from marketing our products in the European Community. The FDA also imposes requirements through quality system requirements, or QSR, regulations, which include requirements for good manufacturing practices, or GMP. Failure by our manufacturers to comply with these requirements could prevent us from obtaining FDA approval of our products and from marketing such products in the United States. Although the manufacturing facilities and processes that we use to manufacture our OLpur MDHDF filter series have been inspected and certified by a worldwide testing and certification agency (also referred to as a notified body) that performs conformity assessments to European Union requirements for medical devices, they have not been inspected by the FDA. A notified body is a group accredited and monitored by governmental agencies that inspects manufacturing facilities and quality control systems at regular intervals and is authorized to carry out unannounced inspections. We cannot be sure that any of the facilities or processes we use will comply or continue to comply with their respective requirements on a timely basis or at all, which could delay or prevent our obtaining the approvals we need to market our products in the European Community and the United States. To market our products in the European Community, the United States and other countries, where approved, manufacturers of such products must continue to comply or ensure compliance with the relevant manufacturing requirements. Although we cannot control the manufacturers of our products, we may need to expend time, resources and effort in product manufacturing and quality control to assist with their continued compliance with these requirements. If violations of applicable requirements are noted during periodic inspections of the manufacturing facilities of our manufacturers, then we may not be able to continue to market the products manufactured in such facilities and our revenues may be materially adversely affected. We may face significant risks associated with international operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. We expect to manufacture and to market our products globally. Our international operations are subject to a number of risks, including the following fluctuations in exchange rates of the United States dollar could adversely affect our results of operations; we may face difficulties in enforcing and collecting accounts receivable under some countries legal systems; local regulations may restrict our ability to sell our products, have our products manufactured or conduct other operations; 18 political instability could disrupt our operations; some governments and customers may have longer payment cycles, with resulting adverse effects on our cash flow; and some countries could impose additional taxes or restrict the import of our products. Any 1 or more of these factors could increase our costs, reduce our revenues, or disrupt our operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Risks Related to Owning Our Common Stock There currently is a limited trading market for our Common Stock. Our Common Stock currently does not meet all of the requirements for initial listing on a registered stock exchange. Our Common Stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board. Trading in our Common Stock on the OTC Bulletin Board has been very limited. As a result, an investor may find it difficult to dispose of or to obtain accurate quotations as to the market value of our Common Stock, and our Common Stock may be less attractive for margin loans, for investment by financial institutions, as consideration in future capital raising transactions or other purposes. There is no guarantee that we will ever become listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market, or any other exchange, or that a liquid trading market for our Common Stock will develop. Our Common Stock could be further diluted as a result of the issuance of additional shares of Common Stock, warrants or options In the past we have issued Common Stock and warrants in order to raise m1y. We have also issued stock options as compensation for services and incentive compensation for our employees, directors and consultants. We have shares of Common Stock reserved for issuance upon the exercise of certain of these securities and may increase the shares reserved for these purposes in the future. Our issuance of additional Common Stock, convertible securities, options and warrants could affect the rights of our stockholders, could reduce the market price of our Common Stock or could result in adjustments to exercise prices of outstanding warrants (resulting in these securities becoming exercisable for, as the case may be, a greater number of shares of our Common Stock), or could obligate us to issue additional shares of Common Stock. Market sales of large amounts of our Common Stock, or the potential for those sales even if they do not actually occur, may have the effect of depressing the market price of our Common Stock, the supply of Common Stock available for resale could be increased which could stimulate trading activity and cause the market price of our Common Stock to drop, even if our business is doing well. Furthermore, the issuance of any additional shares of our Common Stock or securities convertible into our Common Stock could be substantially dilutive to holders of our Common Stock if they do not invest in future offerings. As previously disclosed, we expect to commence a rights offering in March 2013 Holders of our common stock and public warrants that choose not to fully exercise their basic subscription privilege will be diluted as a result of the rights offering if other shareholders fully exercise their basic subscription privilege, and such affected holders voting and other rights will likewise be diluted. The prices at which shares of the Common Stock trade have been and will likely continue to be volatile. In the 2 years ended December 31, 2012, our Common Stock has traded at prices ranging from a high of $319 to a low of $0.40 per share, after giving effect to the 120 reverse stock split effected on March 11, 2011 Due to the lack of an active trading market for our Common Stock, you should expect the prices at which our Common Stock might trade to continue to be highly volatile. The expected volatile price of our stock will make it difficult to predict the value of your investment, to sell your shares at a profit at any given time, or to plan purchases and sales in advance. A variety of other factors might also affect the market price of our Common Stock. These include, but are not limited to achievement or rejection of regulatory approvals by our competitors or us; publicity regarding actual or potential clinical or regulatory results relating to products under development by our competitors or us; delays or failures in initiating, completing or analyzing clinical trials or the unsatisfactory design or results of these trials; announcements of technological innovations or new commercial products by our competitors or us; developments concerning proprietary rights, including patents; regulatory developments in the United States and foreign countries; economic or other crises and other external factors; period to period fluctuations in our results of operations; 19 threatened or actual litigation; changes in financial estimates by securities analysts; and sales of our Common Stock. We are not able to control many of these factors, and we believe that period to period comparisons of our financial results will not necessarily be indicative of our future performance. In addition, the stock market in general, and the market for biotechnology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations in recent years that might have been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of individual companies. These broad market and industry factors might seriously harm the market price of our Common Stock, regardless of our operating performance. Securities class action litigation has often been instituted against companies following periods of volatility in the overall market and in the market price of a company securities. This litigation, if instituted against us, could result in very substantial costs, divert our management attention and resources and harm our business, operating results and financial condition. We have never paid dividends and do not intend to pay cash dividends. We have never paid dividends on our Common Stock and currently do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our Common Stock for the foreseeable future. Consequently, any returns on an investment in our Common Stock in the foreseeable future will have to come from an increase in the value of the stock itself. As noted above, the lack of an active trading market for our Common Stock will make it difficult to value and sell our Common Stock. While our dividend policy will be based on the operating results and capital needs of our business, it is anticipated that all earnings, if any, will be retained to finance our future operations. Because we are subject to the penny stock rules, you may have difficulty in selling our Common Stock. Our Common Stock is subject to regulations of the SEC relating to the market for penny stocks. Penny stock, as defined by the Penny Stock Reform Act, is any equity security not traded on a national securities exchange that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share. The penny stock regulations generally require that a disclosure schedule explaining the penny stock market and the risks associated therewith be delivered to purchasers of penny stocks and impose various sales practice requirements on broker dealers who sell penny stocks to persons other than established customers and accredited investors. The broker dealer must make a suitability determination for each purchaser and receive the purchaser written agreement prior to the sale. In addition, the broker dealer must make certain mandated disclosures, including the actual sale or purchase price and actual bid offer quotations, as well as the compensation to be received by the broker dealer and certain associated persons. The regulations applicable to penny stocks may severely affect the market liquidity for your Common Stock and could limit your ability to sell your securities in the secondary market. Several provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law, our fourth amended and restated certificate of incorporation, as amended, and our second amended and restated bylaws could discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition, which could adversely affect the market price of our Common Stock. Several provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law, our fourth amended and restated certificate of incorporation, as amended, and our second amended and restated bylaws could discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition that stockholders may consider favorable, and the market price of our Common Stock could be reduced as a result. These provisions include authorizing our board of directors to issue blank check preferred stock without stockholder approval; providing for a classified board of directors with staggered, 3 year terms; prohibiting us from engaging in a business combination with an interested stockholder for a period of 3 years after the date of the transaction in which the person became an interested stockholder unless certain provisions are met; prohibiting cumulative voting in the election of directors; limiting the persons who may call special meetings of stockholders; and establishing advance notice requirements for nominations for election to our board of directors or for proposing matters that can be acted on by stockholders at stockholder meetings. As a smaller reporting company with little or no name recognition and with several risks and uncertainties that could impair our business operations, we are not likely to generate widespread interest in our Common Stock. Without widespread interest in our Common Stock, our Common Stock price may be highly volatile and an investment in our Common Stock could decline in value. Unlike many companies with publicly traded securities, we have little or no name recognition in the investment community. We are a relatively new company and very few investors are familiar with either our company or our products. We do not have an active trading market in our Common Stock, and 1 might never develop, or if it does develop, might not continue. 20 Additionally, the market price of our Common Stock may fluctuate significantly in response to many factors, many of which are beyond our control. Risks and uncertainties, including those described elsewhere in this Risk Factors section could impair our business operations or otherwise cause our operating results or prospects to be below expectations of investors and market analysts, which could adversely affect the market price of our Common Stock. As a result, investors in our Common Stock may not be able to resell their shares at or above their purchase price and could lose all of their investment. Securities class action litigation is often brought against public companies following periods of volatility in the market price of such company securities. We may become subject to this type of litigation in the future. Litigation of this type could be extremely expensive and divert management attention and resources from running our company. If we fail to maintain an effective system of internal controls over financial reporting, we may not be able to accurately report our financial results, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and the market value of our securities. Effective internal controls over financial reporting are necessary for us to provide reliable financial reports. If we cannot provide reliable financial reports, our reputation and operating results may be harmed. If management is unable to express a favorable opinion on the effectiveness of our internal controls, we could lose investor confidence in the accuracy and completeness of our financial reports. Any failure to achieve and maintain effective internal controls could have an adverse effect on our business, financial position and results of operations. Our directors, executive officers and Lambda Investors LLC control a significant portion of our stock and, if they choose to vote together, could have sufficient voting power to control the vote on substantially all corporate matters. As of December 31, 2012, our directors, executive officers and Lambda Investors LLC, our largest stockholder, beneficially owned approximately 31% of our outstanding Common Stock, representing approximately 55% on a fully diluted basis. As previously disclosed, we expect to commence a rights offering in March 2013 Holders of our common stock and public warrants that choose not to fully exercise their basic subscription privilege will be diluted as a result of the rights offering if Lambda fully exercises its subscription privilege, and, consequently, such affected holders voting and other rights will likewise be diluted. If our stockholders do not exercise their subscription privilege in full, and Lambda elects to purchase such shares in the rights offering by exercising an oversubscription right, Lambda would increase its ownership percentage and obtain greater voting power. As a result of this ownership, Lambda Investors has the ability to exert significant influence over our policies and affairs, including the election of directors. Lambda Investors, whether acting al1 or acting with other stockholders, could have the power to elect all of our directors and to control the vote on substantially all other corporate matters without the approval of other stockholders. Furthermore, such concentration of voting power could enable Lambda Investors, whether acting al1 or acting with other stockholders, to delay or prevent another party from taking control of our company even where such change of control transaction might be desirable to other stockholders. The interests of Lambda Investors in any matter put before the stockholders may differ from those of any other stockholder. Future sales of our Common Stock could cause the market price of our Common Stock to decline. The market price of our Common Stock could decline due to sales of a large number of shares in the market, including sales of shares by Lambda Investors or any other large stockholder, or the perception that such sales could occur. These sales could also make it more difficult or impossible for us to sell equity securities in the future at a time and price that we deem appropriate to raise funds through future offerings of Common Stock. Future sales of our Common Stock by stockholders could depress the market price of our Common Stock. Shares eligible for future sale may adversely affect the market. From time to time, certain of our stockholders may be eligible to sell all or some of their shares of Common Stock by means of ordinary brokerage transactions in the open market pursuant to Rule 144 promulgated under the Securities Act, subject to certain limitations. In general, pursuant to Rule 144, non affiliate stockholders may sell freely after holding their shares for six months and affiliates may sell freely after holding their shares for 1 year, in each case, subject to current public information, notice and other requirements. Any substantial sales of our Common Stock pursuant to Rule 144 may have a material adverse effect on the market price of our Common Stock. 21 Item 2 Properties
