CIK: 1551152
Company Name: ABBVIE INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-03-15
Accession Number: 0001047469-13-002827


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Separation from Abbott Laboratories On January 1, 2013, AbbVie(1) became an independent company as a result of the distribution by Abbott Laboratories (Abbott) of 100 percent of the outstanding common stock of AbbVie to Abbott's shareholders. Each Abbott shareholder of record as of the close of business on December 12, 2012 (the Record Date) received 1 share of AbbVie common stock for each Abbott common share held as of the Record Date. AbbVie was incorporated in Delaware on April 10, 2012 and is comprised of Abbott's former research based pharmaceuticals business. AbbVie's Registration Statement on Form 10 was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on December 7, 2012 AbbVie's common stock began trading "regular way" under the ticker symbol "ABBV" on the New York Stock Exchange on January 2, 2013 Overview AbbVie is a global, research based biopharmaceutical company. AbbVie develops and markets advanced therapies that address some of the world's most complex and serious diseases. AbbVie products are used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, Crohn's disease, HIV, cystic fibrosis complications, low testoster1, thyroid disease, Parkinson's disease, ulcerative colitis, and complications associated with chronic kidney disease, among other indications. AbbVie also has a pipeline of promising new medicines, including more than 20 compounds or indications in Phase II or Phase III development across such important medical specialties as immunology, renal care, hepatitis C, women's health, oncology, and neuroscience, including multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. The 2010 acquisitions of the U.S. pharmaceuticals business of Solvay Pharmaceuticals and of Facet Biotech Corporation added several new products to AbbVie's portfolio, including the U.S. rights to AndroGel and Creon, and enhanced AbbVie's early and mid stage investigational pipeline by adding an investigational biologic for multiple sclerosis and compounds that complement AbbVie's oncology program. These acquisitions are discussed more fully in Note 4, "Acquisitions, Collaborations and Other Arrangements", of the Notes to Combined Financial Statements. Segments AbbVie operates in 1 business segment pharmaceutical products. Incorporated herein by reference is Note 14 entitled "Segment and Geographic Area Information" of the Notes to Combined Financial Statements included under Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and the sales information related to HUMIRA included in "Financial Review." Products AbbVie's portfolio of proprietary products includes a broad line of adult and pediatric pharmaceuticals. (1) As used throughout the text of this report on Form 10 K, the term "AbbVie" refers to AbbVie Inc., a Delaware corporation, or AbbVie Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, as the context requires. 1 HUMIRA. HUMIRA is a biologic therapy administered as a subcutaneous injection. It is approved to treat the following autoimmune diseases in the United States, Canada, and Mexico (collectively, North America), and in the European Union Condition Principal Markets Rheumatoid arthritis (moderate to severe) North America, European Union Psoriatic arthritis North America, European Union Ankylosing spondylitis North America, European Union Crohn's disease (moderate to severe) North America, European Union Plaque psoriasis (moderate to severe) North America, European Union Juvenile idiopathic arthritis North America, European Union Ulcerative colitis (moderate to severe) United States, European Union Axial spondyloarthritis European Union Pediatric Crohn's disease (severe) European Union HUMIRA is also approved in over 60 other markets, including Japan, Brazil, and Australia. HUMIRA was introduced to the market in January 2003 Its worldwide sales have grown to approximately $9.3 billion in 2012, compared to $7.9 billion in 2011 and $6.5 billion in 2010. HUMIRA accounted for approximately 50 percent of AbbVie's total sales in 2012 The United States composition of matter (that is, compound) patent covering adalimumab is expected to expire in December 2016, and the equivalent European Union patent is expected to expire in the majority of EU countries in April 2018. AbbVie continues to dedicate substantial research and development efforts to expanding indications for HUMIRA, including in the fields of rheumatology (peripheral spondyloarthritis, axial spondyloarthritis and pediatric enthesitis related arthritis), gastroenterology (pediatric Crohn's disease and pediatric ulcerative colitis), dermatology (pediatric psoriasis and hidradenitis suppurativa), and ophthalmology (uveitis). Phase III trials are ongoing in preparation for regulatory applications for uveitis in the United States and the European Union; peripheral and axial spondyloarthritis in the United States; peripheral spondyloarthritis in the European Union; and hidradenitis suppurativa in the United States and the European Union. Metabolics Horm1s products. Metabolic and horm1 products target a number of conditions, including exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, testoster1 deficiency, and hypothyroidism, and generated combined sales of $21 billion in 2012 These products include Synthroid. Synthroid is used in the treatment of hypothyroidism. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Synthroid totaled $551 million. AndroGel. AndroGel is a daily testoster1 replacement therapy that is available in 2 strengths 1 percent and 162 percent. AbbVie's 2012 sales of AndroGel totaled $12 billion. Creon. Creon is a pancreatic enzyme therapy for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, a condition that occurs in patients with cystic fibrosis, chronic pancreatitis, and several other conditions. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Creon totaled $353 million. AbbVie has the rights to sell Synthroid, AndroGel, and Creon only in the United States. Virology products. AbbVie's virology products include 2 products for the treatment of HIV infection, Kaletra and Norvir. Worldwide sales of these products were $14 billion in 2012 Kaletra. Kaletra (also marketed as Aluvia in emerging markets) is a prescription anti HIV 1 medicine that contains 2 protease inhibitors lopinavir and ritonavir. Kaletra is used with other 2 anti HIV 1 medications to increase the chance of treatment response in people with HIV 1 AbbVie's 2012 sales of Kaletra totaled $10 billion. Norvir. Norvir (ritonavir) is a protease inhibitor that is indicated in combination with other antiretroviral agents for the treatment of HIV 1 infection. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Norvir totaled $389 million. Endocrinology products. Lupron (also marketed as Lucrin and Lupron Depot) is a product for the palliative treatment of advanced prostate cancer, treatment of endometriosis and central precocious puberty, and for the preoperative treatment of patients with anemia caused by uterine fibroids. Lupron is approved for daily subcutaneous injection and 1 month, 3 month, four month and six month intramuscular injection. Lupron generated sales of approximately $800 million in 2012 in select markets worldwide. Dyslipidemia products. AbbVie's dyslipidemia products address the range of metabolic conditions characterized by high cholesterol and or high triglycerides. These products, which generated sales of $21 billion in 2012, are primarily marketed to primary care physicians, and include TriCor and TRILIPIX. TriCor and TRILIPIX are fibric acid derivatives that are indicated as adjuncts to diet to reduce total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels, which are key contributors to cardiovascular disease, and to increase HDL cholesterol levels. AbbVie has the rights to sell TriCor and TRILIPIX only in the United States. AbbVie's 2012 combined sales of TriCor and TRILIPIX totaled $11 billion. Niaspan. Niaspan is an extended release form of niacin that is indicated as an adjunct to diet to reduce total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels, and to increase HDL cholesterol levels. AbbVie has the rights to sell Niaspan only in the United States. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Niaspan totaled $911 million. Other products. AbbVie's other products include the following Synagis. Synagis is a product marketed by AbbVie outside of the United States that protects at risk infants from severe respiratory disease, or respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). AbbVie's 2012 sales of Synagis totaled $842 million. Anesthesia products. Sevoflurane (sold under the trademarks Ultane and Sevorane) is an anesthesia product that AbbVie sells worldwide for human use. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Sevoflurane totaled $602 million. Duodopa and Duopa. Duodopa is a levodopa carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG) marketed outside of the United States to treat advanced Parkinson's disease. AbbVie's 2012 sales of Duodopa totaled $149 million. The LCIG therapy has completed Phase III development for the United States under the name Duopa, and AbbVie is pursuing regulatory approval in 2013 in the United States. Zemplar. Zemplar is a product sold worldwide for the prevention and treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism associated with Stage 3, 4, and 5 chronic kidney disease (CKD). AbbVie's 2012 sales of Zemplar totaled $383 million. Research and Development Activities AbbVie has numerous compounds in clinical development, including potential treatments for highly prevalent conditions. Over the past five years, AbbVie has more than doubled the number of compounds in its pipeline through a mix of internal development and external collaboration efforts. AbbVie's ability to discover and develop new compounds is enhanced by the company's use of 3 integrated discovery and development project teams, which include chemists, biologists, physicians, and pharmacologists who work on the same compounds as a team. The research and development process generally begins with discovery research which focuses on the identification of a molecule that has a desired effect against a given disease. If preclinical testing of an identified compound proves successful, the compound moves into clinical development which generally includes the following phases Phase I involves the first human tests in a small number of healthy volunteers or patients to assess safety, tolerability and potential dosing. Phase II tests the molecule's efficacy against the disease in a relatively small group of patients. Phase III tests a molecule that demonstrates favorable results in the earlier phases in a significantly larger patient population to further demonstrate efficacy and safety based on regulatory criteria. The clinical trials from all of the development phases provide the data required to prepare and submit a New Drug Application (NDA), a Biological License Application (BLA) or other submission for regulatory approval to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or similar government agencies outside the U.S. The specific requirements (e.g., scope of clinical trials) for obtaining regulatory approval vary across different countries and geographic regions. The research and development process from discovery through a new drug launch typically takes 8 12 years and can be even longer. There is a significant amount of uncertainty inherent in the research and development of new pharmaceutical products and there is no guarantee when, or if, a molecule will receive the regulatory approval required to launch a new drug or indication. In addition to the development of new products and new formulations, research and development projects also may include Phase IV trials, sometimes called post marketing studies. For such projects, clinical trials are designed and conducted to collect additional data regarding, among other parameters, the benefits and risks of an approved drug. AbbVie spent approximately $28 billion in 2012, $26 billion in 2011, and $25 billion in 2010 on research to discover and develop new products, indications and processes and to improve existing products and processes. These expenses consisted primarily of collaboration fees and expenses, salaries and related expenses for personnel, license fees, consulting payments, contract research, manufacturing, and the costs of laboratory equipment and facilities. Intellectual Property Protection and Regulatory Exclusivity Generally, upon approval, products in development may be entitled to exclusivity under applicable intellectual property and regulatory regimes. AbbVie seeks patent protection, where available, in all significant markets and or countries for each product in development. In the United States, the expiration date for patents filed on or after June 8, 1995 is 20 years after the filing date. Given that patents relating to pharmaceutical products are often obtained early in the development process, and given the amount of time needed to complete clinical trials and other development activities required for regulatory approval, the length of time between product launch and patent expiration is significantly less than 20 years. The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (commonly known as the Hatch Waxman Act) permits a patent holder to seek a patent extension, commonly called a "patent term restoration," for patents on products (or processes for making the product) regulated by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The length of the patent extension is roughly based on 50 percent of the period of time from the filing of an Investigational New Drug Application for a compound to the submission of the NDA for such compound, plus 100 percent of the time period from 4 NDA submission to regulatory approval. The extension, however, cannot exceed five years and the patent term remaining after regulatory approval cannot exceed 14 years. Pharmaceutical products may be entitled to other forms of legal or regulatory exclusivity upon approval. The scope, length, and requirements for each of these exclusivities varies both in the United States and in other jurisdictions. In the United States, if the FDA approves a product that does not contain a previously approved active ingredient, the product is typically entitled to five years of market exclusivity. Other products may be entitled to 3 years of market exclusivity if approval was based on the FDA's reliance on new clinical studies submitted by the NDA applicant. If the NDA applicant studies the product for use by children, the FDA may grant pediatric exclusivity, which extends by 180 days the longest existing exclusivity (patent or regulatory) related to the product. For products that are either used to treat conditions that afflict a relatively small population or for which there is not a reasonable expectation that the research and development costs will be recovered, the FDA may designate the pharmaceutical as an orphan drug and grant it seven years of market exclusivity. Applicable laws and regulations dictate the market exclusivity to which the product is entitled upon its approval in any particular country. In certain instances, regulatory exclusivity may protect a product where patent protection is no longer available or for a period of time in excess of patent protection. It is not possible to estimate for each product in development the total period of exclusivity to which it may become entitled until regulatory approval is obtained. However, given the length of time required to complete clinical development of a pharmaceutical product, the minimum and maximum periods of exclusivity that might be achieved in any individual case would not be expected to exceed 3 and 14 years, respectively. These estimates do not consider other factors, such as the difficulty of recreating the manufacturing process for a particular product or other proprietary knowledge that may delay the introduction of a generic or other follow on product after the expiration of applicable patent and other regulatory exclusivity periods. Biologics such as HUMIRA are entitled to exclusivity under the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act, which was passed on March 23, 2010 as Title VII to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The law provides a pathway for approval of biosimilars following the expiration of 12 years of exclusivity for the innovator biologic and a potential additional 180 day extension term for conducting pediatric studies. The law also includes an extensive process for the innovator biologic and biosimilar manufacturer to litigate patent infringement, validity, and enforceability prior to the approval of the biosimilar. The European Union has also created a pathway for approval of biosimilars and has published guidelines for approval of certain biosimilar products. The more complex nature of biologics and biosimilar products has led to greater regulatory scrutiny and more rigorous requirements for approval of follow on biosimilar products than for small molecule generic pharmaceutical products, and it has also reduced the effect of biosimilars on sales of the innovator biologic as compared to the sales erosion caused by generic versions of small molecule pharmaceutical products. AbbVie owns or has licensed rights to a substantial number of patents and patent applications. Principal trademarks and the products they cover are discussed above in the description of AbbVie's products. AbbVie licenses or owns a patent portfolio of thousands of patent families, each of which includes United States patent applications and or issued patents, and may also contain the non United States counterparts to these patents and applications. These patents and applications, including various patents that expire during the period 2013 to 2031, in the aggregate are believed to be of material importance in the operation of AbbVie's business. However, AbbVie believes that no single patent, license, trademark (or related group of patents, licenses, or trademarks), except for those related to adalimumab (which is sold under the trademark HUMIRA), are material in relation to the company's business as a whole. The United States composition of matter (that is, compound) patent covering adalimumab is expected to expire in 5 December 2016, and the equivalent European Union patent is expected to expire in the majority of EU countries in April 2018. In addition, the following patents, licenses, and trademarks are significant those related to lopinavir ritonavir (which is sold under the trademarks Kaletra and Aluvia), those related to fibric acid derivatives (which are sold under the trademarks TriCor and TRILIPIX), those related to niacin (which is sold under the trademarks Niaspan and Simcor), and those related to testoster1 (which is sold under the trademark AndroGel). The United States composition of matter patent covering lopinavir is expected to expire in 2016. The principal United States non composition of matter patent covering lopinavir ritonavir is expected to expire in 2016. The principal United States non composition of matter patents covering the fibric acid derivative products are expected to expire in 2018, 2020, 2023, and 2025. The principal United States non composition of matter patents covering the niacin products are expected to expire in 2013, 2017, and 2018. The principal non composition of matter patent covering AndroGel is expected to expire in 2020 for the 162 percent formulation and, due to pediatric exclusivity, in 2021 for the 1 percent formulation. Agreements that may affect exclusivity are discussed in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Results of Operations." AbbVie may rely, in some circumstances, on trade secrets to protect its technology. However, trade secrets are difficult to protect. AbbVie seeks to protect its technology and product candidates, in part, by confidentiality agreements with its employees, consultants, advisors, contractors, and collaborators. These agreements may be breached and AbbVie may not have adequate remedies for any breach. In addition, AbbVie's trade secrets may otherwise become known or be independently discovered by competitors. To the extent that AbbVie's employees, consultants, advisors, contractors, and collaborators use intellectual property owned by others in their work for the company, disputes may arise as to the rights in related or resulting know how and inventions. Sales, Marketing, and Distribution Capabilities In 2012, AbbVie's products were sold in over 170 countries. AbbVie utilizes a combination of dedicated commercial resources, regional commercial resources and distributorships to market, sell, and distribute its products worldwide. In the United States, AbbVie distributes pharmaceutical products principally through independent wholesale distributors, with some sales directly to pharmacies. In 2012, 3 wholesale distributors accounted for substantially all of AbbVie's sales in the United States. Sales to McKesson Corporation, Cardinal Health, Inc., and AmerisourceBergen Corporation accounted for 38 percent, 27 percent, and 26 percent, respectively, of AbbVie's 2012 gross sales in the United States. These wholesalers purchase product from AbbVie under standard terms and conditions of sale. AbbVie directs its primary marketing efforts toward securing the prescription, or recommendation, of its brand of products by physicians, key opinion leaders, and other health care providers. Managed care providers (for example, health maintenance organizations and pharmacy benefit managers), hospitals, and state and federal government agencies (for example, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs and the United States Department of Defense) are also important customers. AbbVie also markets directly to consumers themselves, although all of the company's products must be sold pursuant to a prescription in the United States. Outside of the United States, AbbVie focuses its marketing efforts on key opinion leaders, payors, physicians, and country regulatory bodies. AbbVie also provides patient support programs closely related to its products. AbbVie's products are generally sold worldwide directly to wholesalers, distributors, government agencies, health care facilities, specialty pharmacies, and independent retailers from AbbVie owned distribution centers and public warehouses. Outside the United States, sales are made either directly to customers or through distributors, depending on the market served. Approximately 55 60 percent of 6 sales outside the United States are made through wholesalers or distributors. No wholesaler or distributor outside the United States accounts for more than 3 percent of AbbVie's sales. Certain products are co marketed or co promoted with other companies. AbbVie has no single customer that, if the customer were lost, would have a material adverse effect on the company's business. No material portion of AbbVie's business is subject to renegotiation of profits or termination of contracts at the election of the government. Third Party Agreements AbbVie has agreements with third parties for process development, analytical services, and manufacturing of certain products. AbbVie procures certain products and services from a limited number of suppliers and, in some cases, a single supply source. For example, the filling and packaging of HUMIRA syringes to be sold outside of the United States and Puerto Rico is performed by a single supplier at its 2 different facilities. AbbVie does not currently believe that this agreement is material because AbbVie's business is not substantially dependent upon it. AbbVie maintains significant inventory of HUMIRA syringes to reduce the risk of any supply disruption and is awaiting regulatory approval for its own syringe filling and packaging facility in the United States to supply syringes outside of the United States and Puerto Rico. This facility is already approved to provide product to the United States and Puerto Rico. In addition, AbbVie has agreements with third parties for active pharmaceutical ingredient and product manufacturing, formulation and development services, fill, finish, and packaging services, and distribution and logistics services for certain products. AbbVie does not believe that these manufacturing related agreements are material because AbbVie's business is not substantially dependent on any individual agreement. In most cases, AbbVie maintains alternate supply relationships that it can utilize without undue disruption of its manufacturing processes if a third party fails to perform its contractual obligations. AbbVie also maintains sufficient inventory of product to minimize the impact of any supply disruption. AbbVie also has collaboration agreements, as discussed in Note 4, "Acquisitions, Collaborations and Other Arrangements," of the Notes to Combined Financial Statements, and has certain agreements with Abbott, as described in Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence." Sources and Availability of Raw Materials AbbVie purchases, in the ordinary course of business, raw materials and supplies essential to its operations from numerous suppliers around the world, including in the United States. There have been no recent significant availability problems or supply shortages. Orders Orders are generally filled on a current basis, and order backlog is not material to AbbVie's business. Environmental Matters AbbVie believes that its operations comply in all material respects with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection. Regulations under federal and state environmental laws impose stringent limitations on emissions and discharges to the environment from various manufacturing operations. AbbVie's capital and operating expenditures for pollution control in 2012 were approximately $15 million and $132 million, respectively. Capital and operating expenditures for pollution control in 2013 are estimated to be approximately $22 million and $19.0 million, respectively. 7 Abbott was identified as 1 of many potentially responsible parties in investigations and or remediations at several locations in the United States, including Puerto Rico, under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund. Some of these locations were transferred to AbbVie in connection with the separation and distribution, and AbbVie has become a party to these investigations and remediations. Abbott was also engaged in remediation at several other sites, some of which have been transferred to AbbVie in connection with the separation and distribution, in cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency or similar agencies. While it is not feasible to predict with certainty the final costs related to those investigations and remediation activities, AbbVie believes that such costs, together with other expenditures to maintain compliance with applicable laws and regulations concerning environmental protection, should not have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position, cash flows, or results of operations. Competition The markets for AbbVie's products are highly competitive. AbbVie competes with other research based pharmaceuticals and biotechnology companies that discover, manufacture, market, and sell proprietary pharmaceutical products and biologics. For example, HUMIRA competes with a number of anti TNF and other products that are approved for a number of disease states, AbbVie's virology products compete with protease inhibitors and other anti HIV treatments, and AbbVie's dyslipidemia products face competition from other fibrates and from statins. The search for technological innovations in pharmaceutical products is a significant aspect of competition. The introduction of new products by competitors and changes in medical practices and procedures can result in product obsolescence. Price is also a competitive factor. In addition, the substitution of generic pharmaceutical products for branded pharmaceutical products creates competitive pressures on AbbVie's products that do not have patent protection. Biosimilars. Competition for AbbVie's biologic products is affected by the approval of follow on biologics, also known as "biosimilars." Biologics have added major therapeutic options for the treatment of many diseases, including some for which therapies were unavailable or inadequate. The advent of biologics has also raised complex regulatory issues and significant pharmacoeconomic concerns because the cost of developing and producing biologic therapies is typically dramatically higher than for conventional (small molecule) medications, and because many expensive biologic medications are used for ongoing treatment of chronic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis or inflammatory bowel disease, or for the treatment of previously untreatable cancer. Significant investments in biologics infrastructure and manufacturing are necessary to produce biologic products, as are significant investments in marketing, distribution, and sales organization activities, which may limit the number of biosimilar competitors. In the United States, the FDA regulates biologics under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Public Health Service Act, and implementing regulations. While the enactment of federal health care reform legislation in March 2010 was meant to provide a pathway for approval of biosimilars under the Public Health Service Act, recent regulatory guidance suggests that the approval process for biosimilars will be far more extensive than the approval process for generic or other follow on versions of small molecule products, in order to ensure that the safety and efficacy of biosimilars is highly similar to that of an original biologic, such as HUMIRA. Ultimate approval by the FDA is dependent upon many factors, including a showing that the biosimilar is "highly similar" to the original product and has no clinically meaningful differences from the original product in terms of safety, purity, and potency. The types of data that could ordinarily be required in an application to show similarity would include analytical data and studies to demonstrate chemical similarity, animal studies (including toxicity studies), and clinical studies. Applicable regulations also require that the biosimilar must be for the same indication as the original biologic and involve the same mechanism of action, and that the manufacturing facility meets the standards necessary to assure that the biosimilar is safe, pure, and potent. 8 Furthermore, the new law provides that only a biosimilar product that is deemed to be "interchangeable" may be substituted for the original biologic product without the intervention of the health care provider who prescribed the original biologic product. To prove that a biosimilar product is interchangeable, the applicant must demonstrate that the product can be expected to produce the same clinical results as the original biologic product in any given patient, and if the product is administered more than once in a patient, that safety risks and potential for diminished efficacy of alternating or switching between the use of the interchangeable biosimilar biologic product and the original biologic product is no greater than the risk of using the original biologic product without switching. The new law is only beginning to be interpreted and implemented by the FDA. As a result, its ultimate impact, implementation, and meaning will likely be subject to substantial uncertainty for years to come. In the European Union, while a pathway for the approval of biosimilars has existed since 2005, the products that have come to market to date have had a mixed impact on the market share of incumbent products, with significant variation by product. Other Competitive Products. Although a number of competitive biologic branded products have been approved since HUMIRA was first introduced in 2003, most have gained only a modest share of the worldwide market. In addition, the first JAK inhibitor, part of a new class of orally administered class of products, was recently approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis in the U.S. and is under regulatory review in Europe. AbbVie will continue to face competitive pressure from these biologics and orally administered products. Regulation Discovery and Clinical Development United States. Securing approval to market a new pharmaceutical product in the United States requires substantial effort and financial resources and takes several years to complete. The applicant must complete preclinical tests, and obtain FDA approval before commencing clinical trials. Clinical trials are intended to establish the safety and efficacy of the pharmaceutical product and typically are conducted in 3 sequential phases, although the phases may overlap or be combined. If the required clinical testing is successful, the results are submitted to the FDA in the form of an NDA or Biologic Listing Application (BLA) requesting approval to market the product for 1 or more indications. The FDA reviews an NDA or BLA to determine whether a product is safe and effective for its intended use and whether its manufacturing is compliant with current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP). Even if an NDA or a BLA receives approval, the applicant must comply with post approval requirements. For example, holders of an approval must report adverse reactions, provide updated safety and efficacy information, and comply with requirements concerning advertising and promotional labeling. Also, quality control and manufacturing procedures must continue to conform to cGMP after approval. The FDA periodically inspects manufacturing facilities to assess compliance with cGMP, which imposes extensive procedural, substantive, and record keeping requirements. In addition, as a condition of approval, the FDA may require post marketing testing and surveillance to further assess and monitor the product's safety or efficacy after commercialization. Any post approval regulatory obligations, and the cost of complying with such obligations, could expand in the future. Outside the United States. AbbVie is subject to similar regulations outside the United States. AbbVie must obtain approval of a clinical trial application or product from the applicable regulatory authorities before it can commence clinical trials or marketing of the product. The approval requirements and process vary, and the time required to obtain approval may be longer or shorter than that required for FDA approval. For example, AbbVie may submit marketing authorizations in the European Union under either a centralized or decentralized procedure. The centralized procedure is mandatory for the approval of biotechnology products and many pharmaceutical products and provides for a single marketing authorization that is valid for all European Union member states. Under the centralized procedure, a single marketing authorization application is submitted to the European 9 Medicines Agency. After the agency evaluates the application, it makes a recommendation to the European Commission, which then makes the final determination on whether to approve the application. The decentralized procedure provides for mutual recognition of national approval decisions and is available for products that are not subject to the centralized procedure. In Japan, applications for approval of a new product are made through the Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA). Bridging studies to demonstrate that the foreign clinical data applies to Japanese patients may be required. After completing a comprehensive review, the PMDA reports to the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, which then approves or denies the application. The regulatory process in many emerging markets continues to evolve. Many emerging markets, including those in Asia, generally require regulatory approval to have been obtained in a large developed market (such as the United States) before the country will begin or complete its regulatory review process. Some countries also require that local clinical studies be conducted in order to obtain regulatory approval in the country. The requirements governing the conduct of clinical trials and product licensing also vary. In addition, post approval regulatory obligations such as adverse event reporting and cGMP compliance generally apply and may vary by country. For example, after a marketing authorization has been granted in the EU, periodic safety reports must be submitted and other pharmacovigilance measures must be implemented. Regulation Commercialization, Distribution, and Manufacturing The manufacture, marketing, sale, promotion, and distribution of AbbVie's products are subject to comprehensive government regulation. Government regulation by various national, regional, federal, state, and local agencies, both in the United States and other countries, addresses (among other matters) inspection of, and controls over, research and laboratory procedures, clinical investigations, product approvals and manufacturing, labeling, packaging, marketing and promotion, pricing and reimbursement, sampling, distribution, quality control, post marketing surveillance, record keeping, storage, and disposal practices. AbbVie's operations are also affected by trade regulations in many countries that limit the import of raw materials and finished products and by laws and regulations that seek to prevent corruption and bribery in the marketplace (including the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the United Kingdom Bribery Act, which provide guidance on corporate interactions with government officials) and require safeguards for the protection of personal data. In addition, AbbVie is subject to laws and regulations pertaining to health care fraud and abuse, including state and federal anti kickback and false claims laws in the United States. Prescription drug manufacturers such as AbbVie are also subject to taxes, as well as application, product, user, establishment, and other fees. Compliance with these laws and regulations is costly and materially affects AbbVie's business. Among other effects, health care regulations substantially increase the time, difficulty, and costs incurred in obtaining and maintaining approval to market newly developed and existing products. AbbVie expects compliance with these regulations to continue to require significant technical expertise and capital investment to ensure compliance. Failure to comply can delay the release of a new product or result in regulatory and enforcement actions, the seizure or recall of a product, the suspension or revocation of the authority necessary for a product's production and sale, and other civil or criminal sanctions, including fines and penalties. In addition to regulatory initiatives, AbbVie's business can be affected by ongoing studies of the utilization, safety, efficacy, and outcomes of health care products and their comp1nts that are regularly conducted by industry participants, government agencies, and others. These studies can call into question the utilization, safety, and efficacy of previously marketed products. In some cases, these studies have resulted, and may in the future result, in the discontinuance of, or limitations on, 10 marketing of such products domestically or worldwide, and may give rise to claims for damages from persons who believe they have been injured as a result of their use. Access to human health care products continues to be a subject of investigation and action by governmental agencies, legislative bodies, and private organizations in the United States and other countries. A major focus is cost containment. Efforts to reduce health care costs are also being made in the private sector, notably by health care payors and providers, which have instituted various cost reduction and containment measures. AbbVie expects insurers and providers to continue attempts to reduce the cost of health care products. Outside the United States, many countries control the price of health care products directly or indirectly, through reimbursement, payment, pricing, coverage limitations, or compulsory licensing. Budgetary pressures in the United States and in other countries may also heighten the scope and severity of pricing pressures on AbbVie's products for the foreseeable future. United States. Specifically, U.S. federal laws require pharmaceuticals manufacturers to pay certain statutorily prescribed rebates to state Medicaid programs on prescription drugs reimbursed under state Medicaid plans, and the efforts by states to seek additional rebates affect AbbVie's business. Similarly, the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992, as a prerequisite to participation in Medicaid and other federal health care programs, requires that manufacturers extend additional discounts on pharmaceutical products to various federal agencies, including the Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense, and Public Health Service entities and institutions. In addition, recent legislative changes would require similarly discounted prices to be offered to TRICARE program beneficiaries. The Act also established the 340B drug discount program, which requires pharmaceuticals manufacturers to provide products at reduced prices to various designated health care entities and facilities. In the United States, most states also have generic substitution legislation requiring or permitting a dispensing pharmacist to substitute a different manufacturer's generic version of a pharmaceutical product for the 1 prescribed. In addition, the federal government follows a diagnosis related group (DRG) payment system for certain institutional services provided under Medicare or Medicaid and has implemented a prospective payment system (PPS) for services delivered in hospital outpatient, nursing home, and home health settings. DRG and PPS entitle a health care facility to a fixed reimbursement based on the diagnosis and or procedure rather than actual costs incurred in patient treatment, thereby increasing the incentive for the facility to limit or control expenditures for many health care products. Medicare reimburses Part B drugs based on average sales price (ASP) plus a certain percentage to account for physician administration costs, which have recently been reduced in the hospital outpatient setting. End stage renal disease treatment is covered through a bundled payment that likewise creates incentives for providers to demand lower pharmaceutical prices. Medicare enters into contracts with private plans to negotiate prices for most patient administered medicine delivered under Part D. In March 2010, Congress enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (together, the Affordable Care Act). Under the Affordable Care Act, AbbVie pays a fee related to its pharmaceuticals sales to government programs. Also in 2011, AbbVie began providing a discount of 50 percent for branded prescription drugs sold to patients who fall into the Medicare Part D coverage gap, or "donut hole." The Affordable Care Act also includes provisions known as the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, which require manufacturers of drugs and biologics covered under Medicare and Medicaid starting in 2012 to record any transfers of value to physicians and teaching hospitals and to report this data beginning in 2013 to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for subsequent public disclosure. Similar reporting requirements have also been enacted on the state level in the United States, and an increasing number of countries worldwide either have adopted or are considering similar laws requiring disclosure of interactions with health care professionals. Failure to report appropriate data may result in civil or criminal fines and or penalties. 11 AbbVie expects debate to continue during 2013 at all government levels worldwide over the marketing, availability, method of delivery, and payment for health care products and services. AbbVie believes that future legislation and regulation in the markets it serves could affect access to health care products and services, increase rebates, reduce prices or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, change health care delivery systems, create new fees and obligations for the pharmaceuticals industry, or require additional reporting and disclosure. It is not possible to predict the extent to which AbbVie or the health care industry in general might be affected by the matters discussed above. AbbVie is subject to a Corporate Integrity Agreement (CIA) entered into by Abbott on May 7, 2012 that requires enhancements to AbbVie's compliance program and contains reporting obligations, including disclosure of financial payments to doctors. If AbbVie fails to comply with the CIA, the Office of Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services may impose m1tary penalties or exclude AbbVie from federal health care programs, including Medicare and Medicaid. European Union. The EU has adopted directives and other legislation governing labeling, advertising, distribution, supply, pharmacovigilance, and marketing of pharmaceutical products. Such legislation provides mandatory standards throughout the EU and permits member states to supplement these standards with additional regulations. European governments also regulate pharmaceutical product prices through their control of national health care systems that fund a large part of the cost of such products to consumers. As a result, patients are unlikely to use a pharmaceutical product that is not reimbursed by the government. In many European countries, the government either regulates the pricing of a new product at launch or subsequent to launch through direct price controls or reference pricing. In recent years, many countries have also imposed new or additional cost containment measures on pharmaceutical products. Differences between national pricing regimes create price differentials within the EU that can lead to significant parallel trade in pharmaceutical products. Most governments also promote generic substitution by mandating or permitting a pharmacist to substitute a different manufacturer's generic version of a pharmaceutical product for the 1 prescribed and by permitting or mandating that health care professionals prescribe generic versions in certain circumstances. In addition, governments use reimbursement lists to limit the pharmaceutical products that are eligible for reimbursement by national health care systems. Japan. In Japan, the National Health Insurance system maintains a Drug Price List specifying which pharmaceutical products are eligible for reimbursement, and the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare sets the prices of the products on this list. The government generally introduces price cut rounds every other year and also mandates price decreases for specific products. New products judged innovative or useful, that are indicated for pediatric use, or that target orphan or small population diseases, however, may be eligible for a pricing premium. The government has also promoted the use of generics, where available. Emerging Markets. Many emerging markets take steps to reduce pharmaceutical product prices, in some cases through direct price controls and in others through the promotion of generic alternatives to branded pharmaceuticals. Since AbbVie markets its products worldwide, certain products of a local nature and variations of product lines must also meet other local regulatory requirements. Certain additional risks are inherent in conducting business outside the United States, including price and currency exchange controls, changes in currency exchange rates, limitations on participation in local enterprises, expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental action. 12 Employees AbbVie employed approximately 21,500 persons as of January 31, 2013 Outside the United States, some of AbbVie's employees are represented by unions or works councils. AbbVie believes that it has good relations with its employees. Internet Information Copies of AbbVie's Annual Reports on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available free of charge through AbbVie's investor relations website ( www.abbvieinvestor.com ) as soon as reasonably practicable after AbbVie electronically files the material with, or furnishes it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. AbbVie's corporate governance guidelines, outline of directorship qualifications, code of business conduct and the charters of AbbVie's audit committee, compensation committee, nominations and governance committee, and public policy committee are all available on AbbVie's investor relations website ( www.abbvieinvestor.com ). ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS You should carefully consider the following risks and other information in this Form 10 K in evaluating AbbVie and AbbVie's common stock. Any of the following risks could materially and adversely affect AbbVie's results of operations or financial condition. The risk factors generally have been separated into 3 groups risks related to AbbVie's business, risks related to AbbVie's recent separation from Abbott and risks related to AbbVie's common stock. Based on the information currently known to it, AbbVie believes that the following information identifies the most significant risk factors affecting it in each of these categories of risks. However, the risks and uncertainties AbbVie faces are not limited to those set forth in the risk factors described below and may not be in order of importance or probability of occurrence. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to AbbVie or that AbbVie currently believes to be immaterial may also adversely affect its business. In addition, past financial performance may not be a reliable indicator of future performance, and historical trends should not be used to anticipate results or trends in future periods. If any of the following risks and uncertainties develops into actual events, these events could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's business, financial condition or results of operations. In such case, the trading price of AbbVie's common stock could decline. Risks Related to AbbVie's Business The expiration or loss of patent protection and licenses may adversely affect AbbVie's future revenues and operating income. AbbVie relies on patent, trademark and other intellectual property protection in the discovery, development, manufacturing, and sale of its products. In particular, patent protection is, in the aggregate, important in AbbVie's marketing of pharmaceutical products in the United States and most major markets outside of the United States. Patents covering AbbVie products normally provide market exclusivity, which is important for the profitability of many of AbbVie's products. As patents for certain of its products expire, AbbVie will or could face competition from lower priced generic products. The expiration or loss of patent protection for a product typically is followed promptly by substitutes that may significantly reduce sales for that product in a short amount of time. If AbbVie's competitive position is compromised because of generics or otherwise, it could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's business and results of operations. In addition, proposals emerge 13 from time to time for legislation to further encourage the early and rapid approval of generic drugs. Any such proposals that are enacted into law could worsen the effect of generic competition. AbbVie's principal patents and trademarks are described in greater detail in Item 1, "Business Intellectual Property Protection and Regulatory Exclusivity" and Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Results of Operations," and litigation regarding these patents is described in Item 3, "Legal Proceedings." The U.S. composition of matter patent for HUMIRA, which is AbbVie's largest selling product and had worldwide sales of approximately $9.3 billion in 2012, is expected to expire in December 2016, and the equivalent European Union patent is expected to expire in the majority of EU countries in April 2018. Because HUMIRA is a biologic and biologics cannot be readily substituted, it is uncertain what impact the loss of patent protection would have on the sales of HUMIRA. AbbVie's major products could lose patent protection earlier than expected, which could adversely affect AbbVie's future revenues and operating income. Third parties or government authorities may challenge or seek to invalidate or circumvent AbbVie's patents and patent applications. For example, manufacturers of generic pharmaceutical products file, and may continue to file, Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDAs) with the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) seeking to market generic forms of AbbVie's products prior to the expiration of relevant patents owned or licensed by AbbVie by asserting that the patents are invalid, unenforceable and or not infringed. For example, certain companies have filed ANDAs seeking approval to market generic versions of fenofibric acid capsules (TRILIPIX) and niacin extended release tablets (Niaspan). These companies have asserted that the AbbVie patents covering these products are invalid, unenforceable, and or not infringed by their respective products. AbbVie has entered into settlement agreements resolving substantially all of these challenges. For a description of other material pending challenges, please refer to Item 3, "Legal Proceedings." Although most of the challenges to AbbVie's intellectual property have come from other businesses, governments may also challenge intellectual property rights. For example, court decisions and potential legislation relating to patents, such as legislation regarding biosimilars, and other regulatory initiatives may result in further erosion of intellectual property protection. In addition, certain governments outside the United States have indicated that compulsory licenses to patents may be sought to further their domestic policies or on the basis of national emergencies, such as HIV AIDS. If triggered, compulsory licenses could diminish or eliminate sales and profits from those jurisdictions and negatively affect AbbVie's results of operations. AbbVie normally responds to challenges by vigorously defending its patents, including by filing patent infringement lawsuits. Patent litigation and other challenges to AbbVie's patents are costly and unpredictable and may deprive AbbVie of market exclusivity for a patented product. To the extent AbbVie's intellectual property is successfully challenged or circumvented or to the extent such intellectual property does not allow AbbVie to compete effectively, AbbVie's business will suffer. To the extent that countries do not enforce AbbVie's intellectual property rights or require compulsory licensing of AbbVie's intellectual property, AbbVie's future revenues and operating income will be reduced. A third party's intellectual property may prevent AbbVie from selling its products or have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's future profitability and financial condition. Third parties may claim that an AbbVie product infringes upon their intellectual property. Resolving an intellectual property infringement claim can be costly and time consuming and may require AbbVie to enter into license agreements. AbbVie cannot guarantee that it would be able to obtain license agreements on commercially reasonable terms. A successful claim of patent or other 14 intellectual property infringement could subject AbbVie to significant damages or an injunction preventing the manufacture, sale, or use of the affected AbbVie product or products. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's profitability and financial condition. Any significant event that adversely affects HUMIRA revenues could have a material and negative impact on AbbVie's results of operations and cash flows. HUMIRA generates approximately 50 percent of AbbVie's sales. Any significant event that adversely affects HUMIRA's revenues could have a material adverse impact on AbbVie's operations and cash flows. These events could include loss of patent protection for HUMIRA, the approval of biosimilars of HUMIRA, the discovery of previously unknown side effects or impaired efficacy, increased competition from the introduction of new, more effective or less expensive treatments, and discontinuation or removal from the market of HUMIRA for any reason. AbbVie's research and development efforts may not succeed in developing and marketing commercially successful products and technologies, which may cause its revenue and profitability to decline. To remain competitive, AbbVie must continue to launch new products and new indications and or brand extensions for existing products, and such launches must generate revenue sufficient both to cover its substantial research and development costs and to replace sales of profitable products that are lost to or displaced by competing products or therapies. Failure to do so would have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's revenue and profitability. Accordingly, AbbVie commits substantial effort, funds, and other resources to research and development and must make ongoing substantial expenditures without any assurance that its efforts will be commercially successful. For example, in 2012 AbbVie discontinued the development of ABT 263, which was in Phase II development for the treatment of hematologic malignancies. A high rate of failure in the biopharmaceutical industry is inherent in the research and development of new products, and failure can occur at any point in the research and development process, including after significant funds have been invested. Products that appear promising in development may fail to reach the market for numerous reasons, including failure to demonstrate effectiveness, safety concerns, superior safety or efficacy of competing therapies, failure to achieve positive clinical or pre clinical outcomes beyond the current standard of care, inability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals or delays in the approval of new products and new indications, limited scope of approved uses, excessive costs to manufacture, the failure to obtain or maintain intellectual property rights, or infringement of the intellectual property rights of others. Decisions about research studies made early in the development process of a pharmaceutical product candidate can affect the marketing strategy once such candidate receives approval. More detailed studies may demonstrate additional benefits that can help in the marketing, but they also consume time and resources and may delay submitting the pharmaceutical product candidate for approval. AbbVie cannot guarantee that a proper balance of speed and testing will be made with respect to each pharmaceutical product candidate or that decisions in this area would not adversely affect AbbVie's future results. Even if AbbVie successfully develops and markets new products or enhancements to its existing products, they may be quickly rendered obsolete by changing clinical preferences, changing industry standards, or competitors' innovations. AbbVie's innovations may not be accepted quickly in the marketplace because of existing clinical practices or uncertainty over third party reimbursement. AbbVie cannot state with certainty when or whether any of its products under development will be launched, whether it will be able to develop, license, or otherwise acquire compounds or products, or whether any products will be commercially successful. Failure to launch successful new products or new indications for existing products may cause AbbVie's products to become obsolete, causing AbbVie's revenues and operating results to suffer. 15 A portion of AbbVie's near term pharmaceutical pipeline relies on collaborations with third parties, which may adversely affect the development and sale of its products. AbbVie depends on alliances with pharmaceuticals and biotechnology companies for a portion of the products in its near term pharmaceutical pipeline. For example, AbbVie is collaborating with Biogen Idec to develop a treatment for the relapsing remitting form of MS. It is also collaborating with Bristol Myers Squibb on a treatment for multiple myeloma, and with Biotest AG on a compound for rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. Failures by these parties to meet their contractual, regulatory, or other obligations to AbbVie, or any disruption in the relationships between AbbVie and these third parties, could have an adverse effect on AbbVie's pharmaceutical pipeline and business. In addition, AbbVie's collaborative relationships for research and development extend for many years and may give rise to disputes regarding the relative rights, obligations and revenues of AbbVie and its collaboration partners, including the ownership of intellectual property and associated rights and obligations. This could result in the loss of intellectual property rights or protection, delay the development and sale of potential pharmaceutical products, and lead to lengthy and expensive litigation or arbitration. Biologics carry unique risks and uncertainties, which could have a negative impact on future results of operations. The successful discovery, development, manufacturing and sale of biologics is a long, expensive and uncertain process. There are unique risks and uncertainties with biologics. For example, access to and supply of necessary biological materials, such as cell lines, may be limited, and governmental regulations restrict access to and regulate the transport and use of such materials. In addition, the development, manufacturing, and sale of biologics is subject to regulations that are often more complex and extensive than the regulations applicable to other pharmaceutical products. Manufacturing biologics, especially in large quantities, is often complex and may require the use of innovative technologies. Such manufacturing also requires facilities specifically designed and validated for this purpose and sophisticated quality assurance and quality control procedures. Biologics are also frequently costly to manufacture because production inputs are derived from living animal or plant material, and some biologics cannot be made synthetically. Failure to successfully discover, develop, manufacture and sell biologics including HUMIRA could adversely impact AbbVie's business and results of operations. New products and technological advances by AbbVie's competitors may negatively affect AbbVie's results of operations. AbbVie competes with other research based pharmaceuticals and biotechnology companies that discover, manufacture, market, and sell proprietary pharmaceutical products and biologics. For example, HUMIRA competes with a number of anti TNF products that are approved for a number of disease states, AbbVie's virology products compete with protease inhibitors and other anti HIV treatments, and AbbVie's dyslipidemia products face competition from other fibrates and from statins. These competitors may introduce new products or develop technological advances that compete with AbbVie's products in therapeutic areas such as immunology, virology, renal disease, dyslipidemia, and neuroscience. AbbVie cannot predict with certainty the timing or impact of the introduction by competitors of new products or technological advances. Such competing products may be safer, more effective, more effectively marketed or sold, or have lower prices or superior performance features than AbbVie's products, and this could negatively impact AbbVie's business and results of operations. 16 AbbVie's biologic products may become subject to competition from biosimilars. The Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act was passed on March 23, 2010 as Title VII to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The law created a framework for the approval of biosimilars in the United States and could allow competitors to reference data from biologic products already approved. In Europe, the European Commission has granted marketing authorizations for several biosimilars pursuant to a set of general and product class specific guidelines for biosimilar approvals issued over the past few years. In addition, companies are developing biosimilars in other countries that could compete with AbbVie's biologic products. If competitors are able to obtain marketing approval for biosimilars referencing AbbVie's biologic products, AbbVie's products may become subject to competition from such biosimilars, with the attendant competitive pressure and consequences. Expiration or successful challenge of AbbVie's applicable patent rights could also trigger competition from other products, assuming any relevant exclusivity period has expired. As a result, AbbVie could face more litigation with respect to the validity and or scope of patents relating to its biologic products. The manufacture of many of AbbVie's products is a highly exacting and complex process, and if AbbVie or 1 of its suppliers encounters problems manufacturing AbbVie's products, AbbVie's business could suffer. The manufacture of many of AbbVie's products is a highly exacting and complex process, due in part to strict regulatory requirements. Problems may arise during manufacturing for a variety of reasons, including equipment malfunction, failure to follow specific protocols and procedures, problems with raw materials, delays related to the construction of new facilities or the expansion of existing facilities, including those intended to support future demand for AbbVie's products, changes in manufacturing production sites and limits to manufacturing capacity due to regulatory requirements, changes in the types of products produced, physical limitations that could inhibit continuous supply, man made or natural disasters, and environmental factors. If problems arise during the production of a batch of product, that batch of product may have to be discarded and AbbVie may experience product shortages or incur added expenses. This could, among other things, lead to increased costs, lost revenue, damage to customer relations, time and expense spent investigating the cause and, depending on the cause, similar losses with respect to other batches or products. If problems are not discovered before the product is released to the market, recall and product liability costs may also be incurred. AbbVie relies on single sources of supply for certain products and services, and an interruption in the supply of those products and services could adversely affect AbbVie's business and results of operations. AbbVie has a single source of supply for certain products and services. For example, the filling and packaging of HUMIRA syringes to be sold outside of the United States and Puerto Rico is performed by a single supplier at its 2 different facilities. AbbVie maintains significant inventory of HUMIRA syringes intended to reduce the risk of supply disruption and is awaiting regulatory approval for its own syringe filling and packaging facility in the United States to supply syringes outside of the United States and Puerto Rico. AbbVie also uses a number of products in the manufacturing process for HUMIRA that are currently sourced from single suppliers. AbbVie believes alternative sources for all products used in the manufacturing process for HUMIRA are currently available. The failure of a single source supplier to fulfill its contractual obligations in a timely manner or as a result of regulatory noncompliance or physical disruption at a manufacturing site may impair AbbVie's ability to deliver its products to customers on a timely and competitive basis, which could adversely affect AbbVie's business and results of operations. Finding an alternative supplier could take a significant amount of time and involve significant expense due to the nature of the services and the need to obtain regulatory approvals. AbbVie cannot guarantee that it will be able to reach agreement with alternative providers or that regulatory authorities would approve AbbVie's use of such 17 alternatives. AbbVie does, however, carry business interruption insurance, which provides a degree of protection in the case of a failure by a single source supplier. Significant safety or efficacy issues could arise for AbbVie's products, which could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's revenues and financial condition. Pharmaceutical products receive regulatory approval based on data obtained in controlled clinical trials of limited duration. Following regulatory approval, these products will be used over longer periods of time in many patients. Investigators may also conduct additional, and perhaps more extensive, studies. In addition, due to various product withdrawals and other significant safety issues related to pharmaceutical products, the amount of time to obtain regulatory approval has increased industrywide and some health authorities are re reviewing select products that are already marketed. If new safety or efficacy issues are reported or if new scientific information becomes available (including results of post marketing Phase IV trials), or if there are changes in government standards regarding safety, efficacy or labeling, AbbVie may be required to amend the conditions of use for a product. The FDA has authority, based on such new clinical or scientific information, to require post marketing studies, clinical trials and labeling changes and compliance with FDA approved risk evaluation and mitigation strategies. The FDA's exercise of this authority could result in delays or increased costs during product development, clinical trials and regulatory review, increased costs to comply with additional post approval regulatory requirements and potential restrictions on marketing of approved products. Regulatory agencies outside of the United States often have similar authority. New safety data may emerge from adverse event reports, post marketing studies, whether conducted by AbbVie or by others and whether mandated by regulatory agencies or voluntary, and other sources and may adversely affect sales of AbbVie's products. For example, AbbVie may voluntarily provide or be required to provide updated information on a product's label or narrow its approved indication, either of which could reduce the product's market acceptance. If serious safety or efficacy issues with an AbbVie product arise, sales of the product could be halted by AbbVie or by regulatory authorities. Safety or efficacy issues affecting suppliers' or competitors' products also may reduce the market acceptance of AbbVie's products. New data about AbbVie's products, or products similar to its products, could negatively impact demand for AbbVie's products due to real or perceived safety issues or uncertainty regarding efficacy and, in some cases, could result in product withdrawal. Furthermore, new data and information, including information about product misuse, may lead government agencies, professional societies, practice management groups or organizations involved with various diseases to publish guidelines or recommendations related to the use of AbbVie's products or the use of related therapies or place restrictions on sales. Such guidelines or recommendations may lead to lower sales of AbbVie's products. AbbVie is subject to product liability claims and lawsuits that may adversely affect its business and results of operations. In the ordinary course of business, AbbVie is the subject of product liability claims and lawsuits alleging that AbbVie's products or the products of other companies that it promotes have resulted or could result in an unsafe condition for or injury to patients. Product liability claims and lawsuits and safety alerts or product recalls, regardless of their ultimate outcome, may have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's business and reputation and on its ability to attract and retain customers. Consequences may also include additional costs, a decrease in market share for the products, lower income and exposure to other claims. Product liability losses are self insured. Product liability claims could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's business and results of operations. 18 AbbVie is subject to cost containment efforts and pricing pressures that could cause a reduction in future revenues and operating income. Cost containment efforts by governments and private organizations are described in greater detail in Item 1, "Business Regulation Commercialization, Distribution, and Manufacturing." To the extent these cost containment efforts are not offset by greater demand, increased patient access to health care, or other factors, AbbVie's future revenues and operating income will be reduced. In the United States, the European Union and other countries, AbbVie's business has experienced downward pressure on product pricing, and this pressure could increase in the future. In the United States, practices of managed care groups and institutional and governmental purchasers and U.S. federal laws and regulations related to Medicare and Medicaid, including the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, contribute to pricing pressures. Recently enacted changes to the health care system in the United States and the increased purchasing power of entities that negotiate on behalf of Medicare, Medicaid, and private sector beneficiaries could result in additional pricing pressures. In numerous major markets worldwide, the government plays a significant role in funding health care services and determining the pricing and reimbursement of pharmaceutical products. Consequently, in those markets, AbbVie is subject to government decision making and budgetary actions with respect to its products. In particular, there were government mandated price reductions for many pharmaceutical products in many European countries in 2010, 2011, and 2012, and AbbVie anticipates continuing pricing pressures in Europe. Differences between countries in pricing regulations could lead to third party cross border trading in AbbVie's products that results in a reduction in future revenues and operating income. AbbVie is subject to numerous governmental regulations, and it can be costly to comply with these regulations and to develop compliant products and processes. AbbVie's products are subject to rigorous regulation by numerous international, supranational, federal, and state authorities, as described in Item 1, "Business Regulation Discovery and Clinical Development." The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a pharmaceutical product can be costly and time consuming, and approvals might not be granted for future products, or additional indications or uses of existing products, on a timely basis, if at all. Delays in the receipt of, or failure to obtain approvals for, future products, or new indications and uses, could result in delayed realization of product revenues, reduction in revenues, and substantial additional costs. In addition, AbbVie cannot guarantee that it will remain compliant with applicable regulatory requirements once approval has been obtained for a product. These requirements include, among other things, regulations regarding manufacturing practices, product labeling, and advertising and post marketing reporting, including adverse event reports and field alerts due to manufacturing quality concerns. Many of AbbVie's facilities and procedures and those of its suppliers also are subject to ongoing regulation, including periodic inspection by regulatory authorities. AbbVie must incur expense and spend time and effort to ensure compliance with these complex regulations. Possible regulatory actions in the event of non compliance could include warning letters, fines, damages, injunctions, civil penalties, recalls, seizures of AbbVie's products, and criminal prosecution. These actions could result in substantial modifications to AbbVie's business practices and operations; refunds, recalls, or seizures of AbbVie's products; a total or partial shutdown of production in 1 or more of AbbVie's or its suppliers' facilities while AbbVie or its supplier remedies the alleged violation; the inability to obtain future approvals; and withdrawals or suspensions of current products from the market. Any of these events could disrupt AbbVie's business and have a material adverse effect on its business and results of operations. 19 Laws and regulations affecting government benefit programs could impose new obligations on AbbVie, require it to change its business practices, and restrict its operations in the future. The health care industry is subject to various federal, state, and international laws and regulations pertaining to government benefit programs reimbursement, rebates, price reporting and regulation, and health care fraud and abuse. In the United States, these laws include anti kickback and false claims laws, the Medicaid Rebate Statute, the Veterans Health Care Act, and individual state laws relating to pricing and sales and marketing practices. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal and or civil sanctions, including, in some instances, substantial fines, imprisonment, and exclusion from participation in federal and state health care programs, including Medicare, Medicaid, and Veterans Administration health programs. These laws and regulations are broad in scope and they are subject to evolving interpretations, which could require AbbVie to incur substantial costs associated with compliance or to alter 1 or more of its sales or marketing practices. In addition, violations of these laws, or allegations of such violations, could disrupt AbbVie's business and result in a material adverse effect on its business and results of operations. Changes in laws and regulations may adversely affect AbbVie's business. As described above, the development, manufacture, marketing, sale, promotion, and distribution of AbbVie's products are subject to comprehensive government regulation. Changes in these regulations could affect AbbVie in various ways. For example, under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, AbbVie pays a fee related to its pharmaceuticals sales to government programs and, beginning in 2013, must record and report any transfers of value to physicians and teaching hospitals. Similar reporting requirements have been enacted on a state level in the United States and within the European Union and an increasing number of countries worldwide have adopted or are considering similar laws. Future legislation and regulation in the markets that AbbVie serves could affect access to health care products and services, increase rebates, reduce prices or the rate of price increases for health care products and services, change health care delivery systems, create new fees and obligations for the pharmaceuticals industry, or require additional reporting and disclosure. Such legislation and regulation could adversely affect AbbVie's business, results of operations, cash flow, financial condition and prospects. AbbVie could be subject to increased m1tary penalties and or other sanctions, including exclusion from federal health care programs, if it fails to comply with the terms of the May 7, 2012 resolution of the Department of Justice's investigation into sales and marketing activities for Depakote. On May 7, 2012, Abbott settled U.S. federal and 49 state investigations into its sales and marketing activities for Depakote by pleading guilty to a misdemeanor violation of the Food Drug & Cosmetic Act (FDCA) and agreeing to pay approximately $700 million in criminal fines and forfeitures and approximately $900 million to resolve civil claims. A non cash charge related to these investigations was previously recorded, as discussed in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." Under the plea agreement, Abbott submitted to a term of probation that was initially set at 5 years, but will be shortened to 3 years. The obligations of the plea agreement have transferred to and become fully binding on AbbVie. The conditions of probation include certain reporting requirements, maintenance of certain compliance measures, certifications of AbbVie's CEO and board of directors, and other conditions. If AbbVie violates the terms of its probation, it may face additional m1tary sanctions and other such remedies as the court deems appropriate. On October 2, 2012, the court accepted the guilty plea and imposed the agreed upon sentence. In addition, Abbott entered into a five year Corporate Integrity Agreement (CIA) with the Office of Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (OIG). The effective date of the CIA is October 11, 2012 The obligations of the CIA have transferred to and become fully 20 binding on AbbVie. The CIA requires enhancements to AbbVie's compliance program, fulfillment of reporting and monitoring obligations, management certifications, and resolutions from AbbVie's board of directors, among other requirements. If AbbVie fails to comply with the CIA, the OIG may impose m1tary penalties or exclude AbbVie from federal health care programs, including Medicare and Medicaid. AbbVie and Abbott may be subject to third party claims and shareholder lawsuits in connection with the settlement, and AbbVie may be required to indemnify all or a portion of Abbott's costs. AbbVie's compliance with the obligations of the May 7, 2012 resolution of the Department of Justice's investigation into the sales and marketing activities for Depakote will impose additional costs and burdens on AbbVie. On May 7, 2012 Abbott settled U.S. federal and 49 state investigations into its sales and marketing activities for Depakote by pleading guilty to a misdemeanor violation of the FDCA, agreeing to pay criminal fines, forfeitures, and civil damages, and submitting to a term of probation. On October 2, 2012, the court accepted the guilty plea and imposed the agreed upon sentence. In addition, Abbott entered into a five year CIA with the OIG, effective as of October 11, 2012 The obligations of the plea agreement and the CIA have transferred to and become fully binding on AbbVie. Compliance with the requirements of the settlement will impose additional costs and burdens on AbbVie, including in the form of employee training, third party reviews, compliance monitoring, reporting obligations, and management attention. The international nature of AbbVie's business subjects it to additional business risks that may cause its revenue and profitability to decline. AbbVie's business is subject to risks associated with doing business internationally. Sales outside of the United States make up approximately 45 percent of AbbVie's net sales. The risks associated with its operations outside the United States include fluctuations in currency exchange rates; changes in medical reimbursement policies and programs; multiple legal and regulatory requirements that are subject to change and that could restrict AbbVie's ability to manufacture, market, and sell its products; differing local product preferences and product requirements; trade protection measures and import or export licensing requirements; difficulty in establishing, staffing, and managing operations; differing labor regulations; potentially negative consequences from changes in or interpretations of tax laws; political and economic instability, including sovereign debt issues; price and currency exchange controls, limitations on participation in local enterprises, expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental action; inflation, recession and fluctuations in interest rates; compulsory licensing or diminished protection of intellectual property; and potential penalties or other adverse consequences for violations of anti corruption, anti bribery and other similar laws and regulations, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the U.K. Bribery Act. Events contemplated by these risks may, individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's revenues and profitability. 21 Further deterioration in the economic position and credit quality of certain European countries may negatively affect AbbVie's results of operations. Financial instability and fiscal deficits in certain European countries, including Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, may result in additional austerity measures to reduce costs, including health care costs. If economic conditions continue to worsen, this could result in lengthening the time or reducing the collectability of AbbVie's outstanding trade receivables and increasing government efforts to reduce health care spending, leading to reductions in drug prices and utilization of AbbVie's products. Ongoing sovereign debt issues in these countries could increase AbbVie's collection risk given that a significant amount of AbbVie's receivables in these countries are with governmental health care systems. AbbVie may not be able to realize the expected benefits of its investments in emerging markets. AbbVie seeks to make investments in key emerging markets, including Brazil, China, India, Mexico, Russia, and Turkey, but cannot guarantee that its efforts to expand sales in these markets will succeed. Some emerging markets may be especially vulnerable to periods of financial instability or may have very limited resources to spend on health care. For AbbVie to successfully implement its emerging markets strategy, AbbVie must attract and retain qualified personnel or may be required to increase its reliance on third party distributors within certain emerging markets. Many of these countries have currencies that fluctuate substantially; if such currencies devalue and AbbVie cannot offset the devaluations, its financial performance within such countries could be adversely affected. In addition, price and currency exchange controls, limitations on participation in local enterprises, expropriation, nationalization, and other governmental actions could affect AbbVie's business and results of operations in emerging markets. AbbVie may acquire other businesses, license rights to technologies or products, form alliances, or dispose of assets, which could cause it to incur significant expenses and could negatively affect profitability. AbbVie may pursue acquisitions, technology licensing arrangements, and strategic alliances, or dispose of some of its assets, as part of its business strategy. AbbVie may not complete these transactions in a timely manner, on a cost effective basis, or at all, and may not realize the expected benefits. If AbbVie is successful in making an acquisition, the products and technologies that are acquired may not be successful or may require significantly greater resources and investments than originally anticipated. AbbVie may not be able to integrate acquisitions successfully into its existing business and could incur or assume significant debt and unknown or contingent liabilities. AbbVie could also experience negative effects on its reported results of operations from acquisition or disposition related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles and charges for impairment of long term assets. These effects could cause a deterioration of AbbVie's credit rating and result in increased borrowing costs and interest expense. Additionally, changes in AbbVie's structure, operations, revenues, costs, or efficiency resulting from major transactions such as acquisitions, divestitures, mergers, alliances, restructurings or other strategic initiatives, may result in greater than expected costs, may take longer than expected to complete or encounter other difficulties, including the need for regulatory approval where appropriate. AbbVie is dependent on wholesale distributors for distribution of its products in the United States and, accordingly, its results of operations could be adversely affected if they encounter financial difficulties. In 2012, 3 wholesale distributors AmerisourceBergen Corporation, Cardinal Health, Inc. and McKesson Corporation accounted for substantially all of AbbVie's sales in the United States. If 1 of its significant wholesale distributors encounters financial or other difficulties, such distributor may decrease the amount of business that it does with AbbVie, and AbbVie may be unable to collect all the 22 amounts that the distributor owes it on a timely basis or at all, which could negatively impact AbbVie's business and results of operations. Changes in the terms of rebate and chargeback programs, which are common in the pharmaceuticals industry, could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's operations. Rebates related to government programs, such as fee for service Medicaid or Medicaid managed care programs, arise from laws and regulations. AbbVie cannot predict if additional government initiatives to contain health care costs or other factors could lead to new or modified regulatory requirements that include higher or incremental rebates or discounts. Other rebate and discount programs arise from contractual agreements with private payers. Various factors, including market factors and the ability of private payers to control patient access to products, may provide payers the leverage to negotiate higher or additional rebates or discounts that could have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's operations. AbbVie is subject to evolving and complex tax laws, which may result in additional liabilities that may affect results of operations. AbbVie is subject to evolving and complex tax laws in the jurisdictions in which it operates. Significant judgment is required for determining AbbVie's tax liabilities, and AbbVie's tax returns will be periodically examined by various tax authorities. Although Abbott retains the risk for tax contingencies arising from operations pre separation, AbbVie bears risks for future tax contingencies arising from operations post separation. Due to the complexity of tax contingencies, the ultimate resolution of any tax matters related to operations post separation may result in payments greater or less than amounts accrued. In addition, AbbVie may be impacted by changes in tax laws, including tax rate changes, changes to the laws related to the treatment and remittance of foreign earnings, new tax laws, and subsequent interpretations of tax law in the United States and other jurisdictions. AbbVie has debt obligations that could adversely affect its business and its ability to meet its obligations. The amount of debt that AbbVie has incurred and intends to incur could have important consequences to AbbVie and its investors, including requiring a portion of AbbVie's cash flow from operations to make interest payments on this debt; increasing AbbVie's vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions; reducing the cash flow available to fund capital expenditures and other corporate purposes and to grow AbbVie's business; and limiting AbbVie's flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in AbbVie's business and the industry. To the extent that AbbVie incurs additional indebtedness, the risks described above could increase. In addition, AbbVie's cash flow from operations may not be sufficient to repay all of the outstanding debt as it becomes due, and AbbVie may not be able to borrow m1y, sell assets, or otherwise raise funds on acceptable terms, or at all, to refinance its debt. The terms of AbbVie's debt contain covenants restricting its financial flexibility in a number of ways, including among other things, restrictions on AbbVie's ability and the ability of certain of AbbVie's subsidiaries to incur mortgages with respect to principal domestic properties and to enter into sale and leaseback transactions with respect to principal domestic properties, and restrictions on AbbVie's ability to merge or consolidate with any other entity or convey, transfer or lease AbbVie's 23 properties and assets substantially as an entirety. If AbbVie breaches a restrictive covenant under any of its indebtedness, or an event of default occurs in respect of such indebtedness, AbbVie's lenders of such indebtedness may be entitled to declare all amounts owing in respect thereof to be immediately due and payable. Challenges in the commercial and credit environment may adversely affect AbbVie's future access to capital. AbbVie's ability to issue debt or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected if there is a material decline in the demand for AbbVie's products or in the solvency of its customers or suppliers or other significantly unfavorable changes in economic conditions. Volatility in the world financial markets could increase borrowing costs or affect AbbVie's ability to access the capital markets. These conditions may adversely affect AbbVie's ability to obtain and maintain investment grade credit ratings. The investment of AbbVie's cash balance and investments in marketable securities are subject to risks that may cause losses and affect the liquidity of these investments. AbbVie's cash is currently invested in bank deposits and m1y market mutual funds, which typically hold debt securities issued by the U.S. federal government or high grade corporate issuers. These investments are, and AbbVie's future investments may be, subject to credit, liquidity, market, and interest rate risks. If such investments suffer market price declines, AbbVie may recognize in its earnings the decline in the fair value of these investments below their cost basis when the decline is judged to be other than temporary. The risks associated with AbbVie's expected cash balance and investment portfolio may have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's results of operations and financial condition. AbbVie may need additional financing in the future to meet its capital needs or to make opportunistic acquisitions, and such financing may not be available on favorable terms, if at all, and may be dilutive to existing stockholders. AbbVie may need to seek additional financing for its general corporate purposes. For example, it may need to increase its investment in research and development activities or need funds to make acquisitions. AbbVie may be unable to obtain any desired additional financing on terms favorable to it, if at all. If AbbVie loses its investment grade credit rating or adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms, AbbVie may be unable to fund its expansion, successfully develop or enhance products, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which could negatively affect AbbVie's business. If AbbVie raises additional funds through the issuance of equity securities, its stockholders will experience dilution of their ownership interest. If AbbVie raises additional funds by issuing debt or entering into credit facilities, it may be subject to limitations on its operations due to restrictive covenants. Failure to comply with these covenants could adversely affect AbbVie's business. AbbVie depends on information technology and a failure of those systems could adversely affect AbbVie's business. AbbVie relies on sophisticated information technology systems to operate its business. These systems are potentially vulnerable to malicious intrusion, random attack, loss of data privacy, or breakdown. Although AbbVie has invested in the protection of its data and information technology and also monitors its systems on an ongoing basis, there can be no assurance that these efforts will prevent breakdowns or breaches in AbbVie's information technology systems that could adversely affect AbbVie's business. 24 Other factors can have a material adverse effect on AbbVie's profitability and financial condition. Many other factors can affect AbbVie's profitability and financial condition, including changes in or interpretations of laws and regulations, including changes in accounting standards, taxation requirements, product marketing application standards, and environmental laws; differences between the fair value measurement of assets and liabilities and their actual value, particularly for pensions, retiree health care, stock compensation, intangibles, and goodwill; and for contingent liabilities such as litigation, the absence of a recorded amount, or an amount recorded at the minimum, compared to the actual amount; changes in the rate of inflation (including the cost of raw materials, commodities, and supplies), interest rates, market value of AbbVie's equity investments, and the performance of investments held by it or its employee benefit trusts; changes in the credi2rthiness of counterparties that transact business with or provide services to AbbVie or its employee benefit trusts; and changes in business, economic, and political conditions, including war, political instability, terrorist attacks, the threat of future terrorist activity and related military action; natural disasters; the cost and availability of insurance due to any of the foregoing events; labor disputes, strikes, slow downs, or other forms of labor or union activity; and pressure from third party interest groups. Risks Related to AbbVie's Separation from Abbott AbbVie's historical financial information is not necessarily representative of the results that it would have achieved as a separate, publicly traded company and may not be a reliable indicator of its future results. The historical information about AbbVie in this Annual Report on Form 10 K refers to AbbVie's business as operated by and integrated with Abbott. AbbVie's historical financial information is derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Abbott. Accordingly, the financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K does not necessarily reflect the financial condition, results of operations or cash flows that AbbVie would have achieved as a separate, publicly traded company during the periods presented or those that AbbVie will achieve in the future primarily as a result of the factors described below Prior to the separation, AbbVie's business was operated by Abbott as part of its broader corporate organization, rather than as an independent company. Abbott or 1 of its affiliates performed various corporate functions for AbbVie, such as accounting, information technology, and finance. Abbott currently provides some of these functions to AbbVie, as described in Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence." AbbVie's historical financial results reflect allocations of corporate expenses from Abbott for such functions and are likely to be less than the expenses AbbVie would have incurred had it operated as a separate publicly traded company. AbbVie will need to make significant investments to replicate or outsource from other providers certain facilities, systems, infrastructure, and personnel to which AbbVie no longer has access as a result of its separation from Abbott. These initiatives to develop AbbVie's independent ability to operate without access to Abbott's existing operational and administrative infrastructure will be costly to implement. AbbVie may not be able to operate its business efficiently or at comparable costs, and its profitability may decline; Prior to the separation, AbbVie was able to use Abbott's size and purchasing power in procuring various goods and services and shared economies of scope and scale in costs, employees, vendor relationships and customer relationships. Although AbbVie has entered into transition 25 agreements with Abbott, these arrangements may not fully capture the benefits AbbVie previously enjoyed as a result of being integrated with Abbott and may result in AbbVie paying higher charges than in the past for these services. As a separate, independent company, AbbVie may be unable to obtain goods and services at the prices and terms obtained prior to the separation, which could decrease AbbVie's overall profitability. As a separate, independent company, AbbVie also may not be as successful in negotiating favorable tax treatments and credits with governmental entities. This could have an adverse effect on AbbVie's results of operations and financial condition; Generally, AbbVie's working capital requirements and capital for its general corporate purposes, including acquisitions, research and development and capital expenditures, were historically satisfied as part of the corporate wide cash management policies of Abbott. As a result of the separation, AbbVie may need to obtain additional financing from banks, through public offerings or private placements of debt or equity securities, strategic relationships or other arrangements; and The cost of capital for AbbVie's business may be higher than Abbott's cost of capital prior to the separation. Other significant changes may occur in AbbVie's cost structure, management, financing and business operations as a result of operating as a company separate from Abbott. For additional information about the past financial performance of AbbVie's business and the basis of presentation of the financial statements of AbbVie's business, see Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." As AbbVie builds its information technology infrastructure and transitions its data to its own systems, AbbVie could incur substantial additional costs and experience temporary business interruptions. AbbVie expects to install and implement information technology infrastructure to support its critical business functions, including accounting and reporting, manufacturing process control, customer service, inventory control and distribution. AbbVie may incur temporary interruptions in business operations if it cannot transition effectively from Abbott's existing transactional and operational systems, data centers and the transition services that support these functions as AbbVie replaces these systems. AbbVie may not be successful in implementing its new systems and transitioning its data, and it may incur substantially higher costs for implementation than currently anticipated. AbbVie's failure to avoid operational interruptions as it implements the new systems and replaces Abbott's information technology services, or its failure to implement the new systems and replace Abbott's services successfully, could disrupt its business, adversely affect its ability to collect receivables from customers, and have a material adverse effect on its profitability. In addition, if AbbVie is unable to replicate or transition certain systems, its ability to comply with regulatory requirements could be impaired. Abbott may fail to perform under various transaction agreements that have or will be executed as part of the separation or AbbVie may fail to have necessary systems and services in place when certain of the transaction agreements expire. In connection with the separation, AbbVie and Abbott entered into a separation and distribution agreement and various other agreements, including transition services agreements, a tax sharing agreement, international commercial operations agreements, finished goods supply agreements, contract manufacturing agreements, an employee matters agreement, a special products master agreement, an information technology agreement, and a transitional trademark license agreement. These agreements are discussed in greater detail in Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence." Certain of these agreements provide for the performance of services by each 26 company for the benefit of the other for a period of time after AbbVie's separation from Abbott. AbbVie relies on Abbott to satisfy its performance and payment obligations under these agreements. If Abbott is unable to satisfy its obligations under these agreements, including its indemnification obligations, AbbVie could incur operational difficulties or losses. In addition, AbbVie and Abbott entered into long term arrangements under a special products master agreement relating to certain product rights and into an ex U.S. transition services agreement for Abbott to provide AbbVie with back office functions and other services in certain markets outside the United States until AbbVie has established sufficient back office infrastructure to conduct operations in such markets. These arrangements could lead to disputes between Abbott and AbbVie over AbbVie's rights to certain intellectual property and territorial commercialization rights and over the allocation of costs and revenues for AbbVie's products and operations outside of the United States. If AbbVie does not have in place its own systems and services, or if AbbVie does not have agreements with other providers of these services when the transaction or long term agreements terminate, AbbVie may not be able to operate its business effectively and its profitability may decline. AbbVie is in the process of creating its own, or engaging third parties to provide, systems and services to replace many of the systems and services Abbott currently provides to it. AbbVie may not be successful in effectively or efficiently implementing these systems and services or in transitioning data from Abbott's systems to AbbVie's. These systems and services may also be more expensive or less efficient than the systems and services Abbott is expected to provide during the transition period. AbbVie will be developing and implementing its own back office functions, administrative systems, personnel, and processes for markets outside the United States where Abbott will initially provide such functions. There can be no assurance that AbbVie will be able to implement such functions effectively and without disrupting its business in those markets. Potential indemnification liabilities to Abbott pursuant to the separation agreement could materially adversely affect AbbVie. The separation agreement with Abbott provides for, among other things, the principal corporate transactions required to effect the separation, certain conditions to the separation and provisions governing the relationship between AbbVie and Abbott with respect to and resulting from the separation. For a description of the separation agreement, see Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence." Among other things, the separation agreement provides for indemnification obligations designed to make AbbVie financially responsible for substantially all liabilities that may exist relating to its business activities, whether incurred prior to or after AbbVie's separation from Abbott, as well as those obligations of Abbott assumed by AbbVie pursuant to the separation agreement, including those relating to Depakote. If AbbVie is required to indemnify Abbott under the circumstances set forth in the separation agreement, AbbVie may be subject to substantial liabilities. AbbVie may not be able to engage in certain corporate transactions during the 2 year period following the distribution. To preserve the tax free treatment to Abbott of the separation and the distribution, under the tax sharing agreement that AbbVie entered into with Abbott, AbbVie is restricted from taking any action that prevents the distribution and related transactions from being tax free for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Under the tax sharing agreement, for the 2 year period following the distribution, AbbVie is prohibited, except in certain circumstances, from entering into any transaction resulting in the acquisition of 25 percent or more of its stock or substantially all of its assets, whether by merger or otherwise; 27 merging, consolidating, or liquidating; issuing equity securities beyond certain thresholds; repurchasing its capital stock; and ceasing to actively conduct its business. These restrictions may limit AbbVie's ability to pursue certain strategic transactions or other transactions that it may believe to be in the best interests of its stockholders or that might increase the value of its business. In addition, under the tax sharing agreement, AbbVie is required to indemnify Abbott against any such tax liabilities as a result of the acquisition of AbbVie's stock or assets, even if it did not participate in or otherwise facilitate the acquisition. Certain of AbbVie's executive officers and directors may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their previous or continuing positions at Abbott. Because of their former positions with Abbott, certain of these executive officers and directors own Abbott common shares, options to purchase Abbott common shares or other equity awards. Even though AbbVie's board of directors consists of a majority of directors who are independent, and AbbVie's executive officers who were formerly employees of Abbott ceased to be employees of Abbott, some AbbVie executive officers and directors continue to have a financial interest in Abbott common shares. In addition, four of AbbVie's directors currently serve on the board of directors of Abbott. Continuing ownership of Abbott common shares and equity awards, or service as a director at both companies could create, or appear to create, potential conflicts of interest if AbbVie and Abbott pursue the same corporate opportunities or face decisions that could have different implications for AbbVie and Abbott. AbbVie may not achieve some or all of the expected benefits of the separation, and the separation may adversely affect AbbVie's business. AbbVie may not be able to achieve the full strategic and financial benefits expected to result from the separation, or such benefits may be delayed or not occur at all. The separation and distribution is expected to provide the following benefits, among others (i) a distinct investment identity allowing investors to evaluate the merits, performance, and future prospects of AbbVie separately from Abbott; (ii) more efficient allocation of capital for AbbVie; and (iii) direct access by AbbVie to the capital markets. AbbVie may not achieve these and other anticipated benefits for a variety of reasons, including, among others (a) AbbVie may be more susceptible to market fluctuations and other adverse events than if it were still a part of Abbott; (b) AbbVie's business is less diversified than Abbott's business prior to the separation; and (c) the other actions required to separate Abbott's and AbbVie's respective businesses could have diverted management's attention from planning to grow and operate AbbVie's business or created disruptions of AbbVie's operations that could, in each case, impact AbbVie's performance in the future. If AbbVie fails to achieve some or all of the benefits expected to result from the separation, or if such benefits are delayed, the business, financial conditions, and results of operations of AbbVie could be adversely affected. AbbVie may have received better terms from unaffiliated third parties than the terms it will receive in its agreements with Abbott. The agreements AbbVie entered into with Abbott in connection with the separation, including transition services agreements, a tax sharing agreement, international commercial operations agreements, finished goods supply agreements, contract manufacturing agreements, an employee matters agreement, a special products master agreement, an information technology agreement, and a 28 transitional trademark license agreement, were prepared in the context of the separation while AbbVie was still a wholly owned subsidiary of Abbott. Accordingly, during the period in which the terms of those agreements were prepared, AbbVie did not have an independent board of directors or a management team that was independent of Abbott. As a result, the terms of those agreements may not reflect terms that would have resulted from arm's length negotiations between unaffiliated third parties. Arm's length negotiations between Abbott and an unaffiliated third party in another form of transaction, such as a buyer in a sale of a business transaction, may have resulted in more favorable terms to the unaffiliated third party. See Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence." Risks Related to AbbVie's Common Stock AbbVie's stock price may fluctuate significantly. AbbVie cannot predict the prices at which shares of its common stock may trade. The market price of AbbVie's common stock may fluctuate significantly due to a number of factors, some of which may be beyond AbbVie's control, including actual or anticipated fluctuations in AbbVie's operating results; changes in earnings estimated by securities analysts or AbbVie's ability to meet those estimates; the operating and stock price performance of comparable companies; changes to the regulatory and legal environment under which AbbVie operates; and domestic and worldwide economic conditions. In addition, when the market price of a company's common stock drops significantly, stockholders often institute securities class action lawsuits against the company. A lawsuit against AbbVie could cause it to incur substantial costs and could divert the time and attention of its management and other resources. AbbVie cannot guarantee the timing, amount, or payment of dividends on its common stock. Although AbbVie expects to pay regular cash dividends, the timing, declaration, amount and payment of future dividends to stockholders will fall within the discretion of AbbVie's board of directors. The board's decisions regarding the payment of dividends will depend on many factors, such as AbbVie's financial condition, earnings, capital requirements, debt service obligations, industry practice, legal requirements, regulatory constraints, and other factors that the board deems relevant. For more information, see Item 5, "Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities." AbbVie's ability to pay dividends will depend on its ongoing ability to generate cash from operations and access capital markets. AbbVie cannot guarantee that it will pay a dividend in the future or continue to pay any dividend if AbbVie commences paying dividends. Your percentage of ownership in AbbVie may be diluted in the future. In the future, your percentage ownership in AbbVie may be diluted because of equity issuances for capital market transactions, equity awards that AbbVie will be granting to AbbVie's directors, officers and employees, acquisitions, or other purposes. AbbVie's employees will have options to purchase shares of its common stock as a result of conversion of their Abbott stock options (in whole or in part) to AbbVie stock options. AbbVie anticipates its compensation committee will grant additional stock options or other stock based awards to its employees. Such awards will have a dilutive effect on AbbVie's earnings per share, which could adversely affect the market price of AbbVie's common stock. 29 From time to time, AbbVie will issue additional options or other stock based awards to its employees under AbbVie's employee benefits plans. In addition, AbbVie's amended and restated certificate of incorporation authorizes AbbVie to issue, without the approval of AbbVie's stockholders, 1 or more classes or series of preferred stock having such designation, powers, preferences and relative, participating, optional and other special rights, including preferences over AbbVie's common stock respecting dividends and distributions, as AbbVie's board of directors generally may determine. The terms of 1 or more classes or series of preferred stock could dilute the voting power or reduce the value of AbbVie's common stock. For example, AbbVie could grant the holders of preferred stock the right to elect some number of AbbVie's directors in all events or on the happening of specified events or the right to veto specified transactions. Similarly, the repurchase or redemption rights or liquidation preferences AbbVie could assign to holders of preferred stock could affect the residual value of the common stock. Certain provisions in AbbVie's amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated by laws, and of Delaware law, may prevent or delay an acquisition of AbbVie, which could decrease the trading price of AbbVie's common stock. AbbVie's amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated by laws contain, and Delaware law contains, provisions that are intended to deter coercive takeover practices and inadequate takeover bids by making such practices or bids unacceptably expensive to the bidder and to encourage prospective acquirors to negotiate with AbbVie's board of directors rather than to attempt a hostile takeover. These provisions include, among others the inability of AbbVie's stockholders to call a special meeting; rules regarding how stockholders may present proposals or nominate directors for election at stockholder meetings; the right of AbbVie's board to issue preferred stock without stockholder approval; the division of AbbVie's board of directors into 3 classes of directors, with each class serving a staggered 3 year term; a provision that stockholders may only remove directors for cause; the ability of AbbVie's directors, and not stockholders, to fill vacancies on AbbVie's board of directors; and the requirement that the affirmative vote of stockholders holding at least 80 percent of AbbVie's voting stock is required to amend certain provisions in AbbVie's amended and restated certificate of incorporation and AbbVie's amended and restated by laws relating to the number, term and election of AbbVie's directors, the filling of board vacancies, the calling of special meetings of stockholders and director and officer indemnification provisions. In addition, because AbbVie has not chosen to be exempt from Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, this provision could also delay or prevent a change of control that you may favor. Section 203 provides that, subject to limited exceptions, persons that acquire, or are affiliated with a person that acquires, more than 15 percent of the outstanding voting stock of a Delaware corporation shall not engage in any business combination with that corporation, including by merger, consolidation or acquisitions of additional shares, for a 3 year period following the date on which that person or its affiliates becomes the holder of more than 15 percent of the corporation's outstanding voting stock. AbbVie believes these provisions protect its stockholders from coercive or otherwise unfair takeover tactics by requiring potential acquirors to negotiate with AbbVie's board of directors and by 30 providing AbbVie's board of directors with more time to assess any acquisition proposal. These provisions are not intended to make the company immune from takeovers. However, these provisions apply even if the offer may be considered beneficial by some stockholders and could delay or prevent an acquisition that AbbVie's board of directors determines is not in the best interests of AbbVie and AbbVie's stockholders. These provisions may also prevent or discourage attempts to remove and replace incumbent directors. Several of the agreements that AbbVie has entered into with Abbott require Abbott's consent to any assignment by AbbVie of its rights and obligations under the agreements. These agreements will generally expire within 2 years of AbbVie's separation from Abbott, except for certain agreements that will continue for longer terms and in some cases for the life of the products covered by the agreements. The consent and termination rights set forth in these agreements might discourage, delay or prevent a change of control that you may consider favorable. See Item 13, "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence" for a more detailed description of these agreements and provisions. In addition, an acquisition or further issuance of AbbVie's stock could trigger the application of Section 355(e) of the Internal Revenue Code. Under the tax sharing agreement, AbbVie would be required to indemnify Abbott for the resulting tax, and this indemnity obligation might discourage, delay or prevent a change of control that you may consider favorable. CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains certain forward looking statements regarding business strategies, market potential, future financial performance and other matters. The words "believe," "expect," "anticipate," "project" and similar expressions, among others, generally identify "forward looking statements," which speak only as of the date the statements were made. The matters discussed in these forward looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected, anticipated or implied in the forward looking statements. In particular, information included under Item 1, "Business," Item 1A, "Risk Factors," and Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" contain forward looking statements. Where, in any forward looking statement, an expectation or belief as to future results or events is expressed, such expectation or belief is based on the current plans and expectations of AbbVie management and expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the expectation or belief will result or be achieved or accomplished. Factors that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those anticipated include the matters described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" and Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." AbbVie does not undertake any obligation to update the forward looking statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof, unless AbbVie is required by applicable securities law to do so. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 31 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES 
