CIK: 310764
Company Name: STRYKER CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2015-02-12
Accession Number: 0000310764-15-000022


ITEM 1 BUSINESS. General Stryker Corporation is 1 of the world's leading medical technology companies, with 2014 revenues of $9,675 and net earnings of $515 . Stryker's products include implants used in joint replacement and trauma surgeries; surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems; endoscopic and communications systems; patient handling and emergency medical equipment; neurosurgical, neurovascular and spinal devices; as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. Stryker was incorporated in Michigan in 1946 as the successor company to a business founded in 1941 by Dr. Homer H. Stryker, a prominent orthopaedic surgeon and the inventor of several orthopaedic products. In the United States, most of our products are marketed directly to doctors, hospitals and other healthcare facilities. Internationally, our products are sold in over 100 countries through company owned sales subsidiaries and branches as well as third party dealers and distributors. As used herein, and except where the context otherwise requires, "Stryker," "we," "us," and "our" refer to Stryker Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. Business Segments and Geographic Information In December 2014 we changed the name of our Reconstructive business segment to Orthopaedics. This change did not change the composition of any of our business segments and had no financial impact. We segregate our reporting into 3 reportable business segments Orthopaedics, MedSurg, and Neurotechnology and Spine. Financial information regarding our reportable business segments and certain geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Net sales by reportable segment over the last 3 years were 2014 2013 2012 Orthopaedics $ 4,153 43 % $ 3,949 44 % $ 3,823 44 % MedSurg 3,781 39 % 3,414 38 % 3,265 38 % Neurotechnology and Spine 1,741 18 % 1,658 18 % 1,569 18 % Total $ 9,675 100 % $ 9,021 100 % $ 8,657 100 % Orthopaedics Orthopaedics products consist primarily of implants used in hip and knee joint replacements and trauma and extremities surgeries. We bring patients and physicians advanced implant designs and specialized instrumentation that make orthopaedic surgery and recovery simpler, faster and more effective. We support surgeons with the technology and services they need as they develop new surgical techniques. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors globally for joint replacement and trauma products; the other four are Zimmer Holdings, Inc. (Zimmer), DePuy Synthes Company, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, Biomet, Inc. and Smith & Nephew plc (Smith & Nephew). The composition of net sales of Orthopaedics products over the last 3 years was 2014 2013 2012 Knees $ 1,396 34 % $ 1,371 35 % $ 1,356 35 % Hips 1,291 31 % 1,272 32 % 1,233 32 % Trauma and Extremities 1,230 30 % 1,116 28 % 989 26 % Other 236 5 % 190 5 % 245 7 % Total $ 4,153 100 % $ 3,949 100 % $ 3,823 100 % In September 2014 we acquired certain assets of Small B1 Innovations, Inc. (SBi) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $ 358 . SBi products are designed and promoted for upper and lower extremity small b1 indications, with a focus on small joint replacement. In December 2013 we acquired MAKO Surgical Corp. (MAKO). The acquisition of MAKO, combined with our strong history in joint reconstruction, capital equipment (operating room integration and surgical navigation) and surgical instruments, will help further advance the growth of robotic arm assisted surgery. Our combined expertise offers the potential to simplify joint reconstruction procedures, reduce variability and enhance the surgeon and patient experience. In March 2013 we acquired Trauson Holdings Company Limited (Trauson). The acquisition of Trauson enhances our product offerings, primarily within our Orthopaedics segment, broadens our presence in China and enables us to expand into the fast growing value segment of the emerging markets. In 2013 we launched the Tritanium Cementless Baseplate for our Triathlon Knee Arthroscopy (TKA) system, which combines biologic fixation with Triathlon kinematics to provide surgeons with a superior option for cementless TKA. We also launched the Secur Fit Advanced Femoral Hip Stem, which facilitates the accurate restoration of biomechanics when used with our new and unique Stryker Orthopaedics Modeling and Analytics system. In 2012 we voluntarily recalled our Rejuvenate and ABG II Modular Neck hip stems and terminated global distribution of these hip products. We notified healthcare professionals and regulatory bodies of this recall, which was taken due to potential risks associated with fretting and or corrosion that may lead to adverse local tissue reactions. In November 2014 we entered into a Settlement Agreement (the Settlement Agreement ) to compensate eligible United States patients who had surgery to replace their Rejuvenate and ABG II modular neck hip stems, known as a "revision surgery", prior to November 3, 2014. To date we have recorded charges to earnings totaling $1,534 ($1,713 before $179 of third party insurance recoveries) representing the actuarially determined low end of the range of probable loss to resolve this entire matter globally. It is expected that a majority of the payments under the Settlement Agreement will be made by the end of 2015. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for further information. In 2012 we launched Accolade II, the first hip stem with a Morphometric Wedge design, an evolution of the tapered wedge stem. MedSurg MedSurg products include surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems (Instruments); endoscopic and communications systems (Endoscopy); patient handling and emergency medical equipment (Medical); and reprocessed and remanufactured medical devices (Sustainability) as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. 1 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2014 Form 10 K Stryker is 1 of four market leaders in Instruments, competing principally with Zimmer, Medtronic plc. and ConMed Linvatec, Inc., a subsidiary of CONMED Corporation (ConMed Linvatec) globally. In Endoscopy, we compete with Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, ConMed Linvatec, Inc., Arthrex, Inc., Karl Storz GmbH & Co. and Olympus Optical Co. Ltd. Our primary competitor in Medical is Hill Rom Holdings, Inc. The composition of net sales of MedSurg products over the last 3 years was 2014 2013 2012 Instruments $ 1,424 38 % $ 1,269 37 % $ 1,261 39 % Endoscopy 1,382 37 % 1,222 36 % 1,111 34 % Medical 766 20 % 710 21 % 691 21 % Sustainability 209 5 % 213 6 % 202 6 % Total $ 3,781 100 % $ 3,414 100 % $ 3,265 100 % In January 2015 we announced the asset acquisition of privately held CHG Hospital Beds, Inc. ("CHG") in an all cash transaction. CHG, headquartered in London, Ontario, Canada, manufactures and markets low height hospital beds and related accessories across Canada, and in the United States and the United Kingdom. In April 2014 we acquired Berchtold Holding, AG (Berchtold), a privately held business with operations in Germany and the United States, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $184. Berchtold sells surgical tables, equipment booms and surgical lighting systems. In March 2014 we acquired Patient Safety Technologies, Inc. (PST), for an aggregate purchase price of $120. PST conducts its business through its wholly owned subsidiary, SurgiCount Medical, Inc. PST proprietary Safety Sponge System and SurgiCount 360 compliance software help prevent Retained Foreign Objects in the operating room. Other business acquisitions in 2014 include the acquisition of Pivot Medical, Inc. (Pivot), which develops and sells innovative products for hip arthroscopy. In March 2013 we received a warning letter from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concerning quality system observations made during an inspection and citing us for failing to notify the FDA of a product recall and for marketing devices, including certain of our Neptune Waste Management Systems, without a required 510(k) clearance. We were notified in January 2014 that the actions taken to address issues raised in the warning letter were sufficient and no further corrective actions related to the warning letter were required. In December 2013 we received 510(k) clearance to market a modified Neptune 2 Waste Management System. The Neptune 2 Waste Management System mitigates risks to healthcare workers by eliminating harmful exposure to fluids and smoke in the operating room. This constantly closed system collects surgical waste and disposes of it without exposing the operator to contact with infectious fluids and surgical plumes. In 2012 we launched System 7, the next generation of heavy duty surgical power tools. These tools are used in total joint procedures, such as hip and knee replacements, and offer the latest in advanced cutting technology. We also launched the 1488 HD 3 Chip Endoscopic Camera System, which utilizes advanced CMOS technology and premium optics to provide a clear bright image designed to enhance patient outcomes. In addition, we launched Power LOAD TM , our cot fastener system that lifts and lowers the cot into and out of ambulances, thereby reducing spinal loads and the risk of cumulative trauma injuries to emergency responders. Neurotechnology and Spine Our Neurotechnology and Spine products include both neurosurgical and neurovascular devices. Our neurotechnology offering includes products used for minimally invasive endovascular techniques; a comprehensive line of products for traditional brain and open skull base surgical procedures; orthobiologic and biosurgery products, including synthetic b1 grafts and vertebral augmentation products; and minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. We also develop, manufacture and market spinal implant products including cervical, thoracolumbar and interbody systems used in spinal injury, deformity and degenerative therapies. Our primary competitors in Neurotechnology are Medtronic, including Covidien, which was recently acquired by Medtronic, and Johnson & Johnson. We are 1 of five market leaders in Spine, along with Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc. (a subsidiary of Medtronic), DePuy Synthes (a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson), Nuvasive, Inc. and Globus Medical, Inc. The composition of net sales of Neurotechnology and Spine products over the last 3 years was 2014 2013 2012 Neurotechnology $ 1,001 57 % $ 915 55 % $ 842 54 % Spine 740 43 % 743 45 % 727 46 % Total $ 1,741 100 % $ 1,658 100 % $ 1,569 100 % In 2012 we received 510(k) clearance to market the Trevo Pro Retriever, our next generation clot removal technology that utilizes proprietary Stentriever Technology for optimized clot integration and retrieval in patients experiencing acute ischemic stroke. In addition, we received 510(k) clearance to market our Trevo ProVEU TM Retriever, the first clot removal device fully visible during the procedure for precise positioning within the clot and optimized clot retrieval in patients experiencing acute ischemic stroke. Geographic Areas In 2014 approximately 68.0% of our revenues were generated from customers in the United States. Additional geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Raw Materials and Inventory Raw materials essential to our business are generally readily available from multiple sources. Substantially all products we manufacture are stocked in inventory, while certain MedSurg products are assembled to order. The dollar amount of backlog orders at any given time is not considered material to an understanding of our business taken as a whole. Patents and Trademarks Patents and trademarks are significant to our business to the extent that a product or an attribute of a product represents a unique design or process. Patent protection of such products restricts competitors from duplicating these unique designs and features. We seek to obtain patent protection on our products whenever appropriate for protecting our competitive advantage. As of December 31, 2014 we owned approximately 1,900 United States patents and approximately 3,400 international patents. Seasonality Our business is generally not seasonal in nature; however, the number of Orthopaedics implant surgeries is generally lower during the summer months and sales of capital equipment are generally higher in the fourth quarter. 2 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2014 Form 10 K Competition In all of our product lines we compete with local and global companies located throughout the world. Competition exists in all product lines without regard to the number and size of the competing companies involved. The development of new and innovative products is important to our success in all areas of our business and competition in research, involving the development and the improvement of new and existing products and processes, is particularly significant. The competitive environment requires substantial investments in continuing research and in maintaining sales forces. The principal factors that we believe differentiate us in the highly competitive product categories in which we operate and enable us to compete effectively include our commitment to innovation and quality, service and reputation. We believe that our competitive position in the future will depend to a large degree on our ability to develop new products and make improvements to existing products. Product Development Most of our products and product improvements have been developed internally at research facilities in the United States, Ireland, Puerto Rico, Germany, Switzerland, India and France. We also invest through acquisitions in technologies developed by third parties that have the potential to expand the markets in which we operate. We maintain close working relationships with physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist us in product development efforts. The total costs of research, development and engineering activities were $614, $536, and $471 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Regulation Our businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in which we operate, and the general trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. In the United States, the Medical Device Amendments of 1976 to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and its subsequent amendments, and the regulations issued and proposed thereunder, provide for regulation by the FDA of the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, including most of our products. Many of our new products fall into FDA classifications that require notification submitted as a 510(k) and review by the FDA before we begin marketing them. Certain of our products require extensive clinical testing, consisting of safety and efficacy studies, followed by pre market approval (PMA) applications for specific surgical indications. The FDA's Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our facilities by the FDA. There are also certain requirements of state and local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacture and marketing of our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directives that form a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to meet certain quality system requirements and obtain CE marking for their products. We have authorization to apply the CE marking to substantially all of our products. In addition, we comply with the unique regulatory requirements of each of the countries in Europe and other countries in which we market our products. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare expenses generally and hospital costs in particular, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. It is not possible to predict at this time the long term impact of such cost containment measures on our future business. In addition, business practices in the healthcare industry have come under increased scrutiny, particularly in the United States, by government agencies and state attorneys general, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties. Employees At December 31, 2014 , we had approximately 26,000 employees worldwide. Certain international employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain positive relationships with our employees worldwide. Executive Officers of the Registrant The names and ages of our executive officers as of January 31, 2015 and certain information about them are Name Age First Became an Executive Officer Kevin A. Lobo 49 Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer 2011 Steven P. Benscoter 47 Vice President, Human Resources 2012 William E. Berry Jr. 49 Vice President, Corporate Controller and Principal Accounting Officer 2014 Lonny J. Carpenter 53 Group President, Global Quality and Operations 2008 David K. Floyd 54 Group President, Orthopaedics 2012 Michael D. Hutchinson 44 General Counsel 2014 William R. Jellison 57 Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 2013 Katherine A. Owen 44 Vice President, Strategy and Investor Relations 2007 Bijoy S.N. Sagar 46 Vice President, Chief Information Officer 2014 Timothy J. Scannell 50 Group President, MedSurg and Neurotechnology 2008 Ramesh Subrahmanian 53 Group President, International 2011 Each of our executive officers was elected by our Board of Directors to serve in the office indicated until the first meeting of the Board of Directors following the annual meeting of shareholders in 2015 or until a successor is chosen and qualified or until his or her resignation or removal. Each of our executive officers has held the position above or has served Stryker in various executive or administrative capacities for at least five years, except for Mr. Lobo, Mr. Berry, Mr. Jellison, Mr. Sagar, Mr. Subrahmanian and Mr. Floyd. Prior to joining Stryker in April 2011, Mr. Lobo held a variety of senior level leadership roles for the previous nine years at Johnson & Johnson, most recently as Worldwide President of Ethicon Endo Surgery. Prior to joining Stryker in August 2011, Mr. Berry served for 2 years as Assistant Corporate Controller for Whirlpool Corporation, the world's leading manufacturer and marketer of major home appliances, and before that held a variety of senior finance roles at Delphi Automotive and Federal Mogul Corporation, both global automotive parts manufacturers. Prior to joining Stryker in April 2013, Mr. Jellison was Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at Dentsply International, the world's largest manufacturer of professional dental products, and before that held a variety of senior level leadership roles over a 15 year period at Dentsply. Prior to joining Stryker in May 2014, Mr. Sagar served 3 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2014 Form 10 K as the Chief Information officer for Merck Millipore, and before that as Global Head of Information Systems and a member of the divisional board for the chemicals division of Merck KGaA. Prior to joining Stryker in September 2011, Mr. Subrahmanian was the Senior Vice President & President, Asia Pacific Human Health with Merck & Co. Inc. Prior to joining Stryker in November 2012, Mr. Floyd was the Chief Executive Officer for OrthoWorx and held a variety of senior level leadership roles with DePuy (a division of Johnson & Johnson), Abbott Spine, AxioMed Spine, and Centerpulse Orthopaedics. Available Information Our main corporate website address is www.stryker.com. Copies of our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Annual Reports on Form 10 K and Current Reports on Form 8 K filed or furnished to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request to our Corporate Secretary at our principal executive offices. All of our SEC filings are also available free of charge on our website within the "For Investors SEC Filings & Ownership Reports" link as soon as reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. All SEC filings are also available at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov . ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS. This report contains statements referring to us that are not historical facts and are considered "forward looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are intended to take advantage of the "safe harbor" provisions of the Reform Act, are based on current projections about operations, industry conditions, financial condition and liquidity. Words that identify forward looking statements include words such as "may," "could," "will," "should," "possible," "plan," "predict," "forecast," "potential," "anticipate," "estimate," "expect," "project," "intend," "believe," "may impact," "on track," and words and terms of similar substance used in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance, an acquisition or our businesses. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward looking statements. Those statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results could differ materially and adversely from these forward looking statements. Some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward looking statements include the risks discussed below. Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition or results of operations. LEGAL AND REGULATORY RISKS The impact of United States healthcare reform legislation on our business remains uncertain. In 2010 federal legislation to reform the United States healthcare system was enacted into law. The legislation is far reaching and is intended to expand access to health insurance coverage and improve the quality and reduce the costs of healthcare over time. Its provisions become effective at various dates and there are many programs and requirements for which the details have not been determined. We expect the law will have a significant impact upon various aspects of our business operations. Among other things, the law imposed a 23 percent excise tax on Class I, II and III medical devices that applies to United States sales of a majority of our medical device products. Other provisions of this legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at improving quality and decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, could meaningfully change the way healthcare is developed and delivered. Further, we cannot predict what other healthcare programs and regulations will be ultimately implemented at the federal or state level or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the United States on our business and results of operations We may be adversely affected by product liability claims, unfavorable court decisions or legal settlements. Our business exposes us to potential product liability risks that are inherent in the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, many of which are intended to be implanted in the human body for long periods of time or indefinitely. We are currently defendants in a number of product liability matters, including those relating to our Rejuvenate and ABGII Modular Neck hip stems discussed in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. These matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable. In addition, we may incur significant legal expenses regardless of whether we are found to be liable. We are currently self insured for product liability related claims and expenses. The ultimate cost to us with respect to product liability claims could be materially different than the amount of the current estimates and accruals and could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Intellectual property litigation and infringement claims could cause us to incur significant expenses or prevent us from selling certain of our products. The medical device industry is characterized by extensive intellectual property litigation and, from time to time, we are the subject of claims by third parties of potential infringement or misappropriation. Regardless of outcome, such claims are expensive to defend and divert the time and effort of management and operating personnel from other business issues. A successful claim or claims of patent or other intellectual property infringement against us could result in our payment of significant m1tary damages and or royalty payments or negatively impact our ability to sell current or future products in the affected category. Dependence on patent and other proprietary rights and failing to protect such rights or to be successful in litigation related to such rights may impact offerings in our product portfolios. Our long term success largely depends on our ability to market technologically competitive products. If we fail to obtain or maintain adequate intellectual property protection, such a failure could allow others to sell products that compete with offerings in our product portfolio. Also, our issued patents are subject to claims concerning priority, scope and other issues, and currently pending or future patent applications may not result in issued patents. We are subject to extensive governmental regulations relating to the manufacturing, labeling and marketing of our products. Substantially all of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other governmental authorities in the United States and internationally. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a medical device can be costly and time consuming and approvals might not be granted for future products on a timely basis, if at all. We have ongoing responsibilities under FDA regulations with respect to our products and facilities and are subject to periodic inspections by the FDA to determine compliance with the quality system and medical device reporting regulations and other requirements. If we fail to fully comply with applicable regulatory requirements, we may be subject to a range of sanctions, including 4 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2014 Form 10 K warning letters, product recalls, the suspension of product manufacturing, m1tary fines and criminal prosecution. We are subject to federal, state and foreign healthcare regulations, including fraud and abuse laws, as well as anti bribery laws, and could face substantial penalties if we fail to fully comply with such regulations and laws. Our relationship with healthcare professionals, such as physicians, hospitals and those that may market our products, are subject to scrutiny under various state and federal laws often referred to collectively as healthcare fraud and abuse laws. In addition, the United States and foreign government regulators have increased the enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and other anti bribery laws. These laws are broad in scope and are subject to evolving interpretation, which could require us to incur substantial costs to monitor compliance or to alter our practices if we are found not to be in compliance. We also must comply with a variety of other laws which protect the privacy of individually identifiable healthcare information and impose extensive tracking and reporting related to all transfers of value provided to certain healthcare professionals. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal or civil sanctions, including substantial fines, imprisonment and exclusion from participation in governmental healthcare programs. MARKET RISKS Macroeconomic developments could negatively affect our ability to conduct business in affected regions. Financial difficulties experienced by our customers, including distributors, and suppliers could result in product delays and inventory issues; risks to accounts receivable could also include delays in collection and greater bad debt expense. Exposure to exchange rate fluctuations on cross border transactions and translation of local currency results into United States dollars. We report our financial results in United States Dollars and approximately 1 third of our revenues are denominated in foreign currencies, including the Euro, the British Pound, and the Japanese Yen. Cross border transactions, both with external parties and intercompany relationships, result in increased exposure to foreign exchange effects. Our results of operations and, in some cases, cash flows, have been and may in the future be adversely affected by movements in foreign exchange rates. While we implement currency hedges to partially reduce our exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates; our hedging strategies may not be successful, and our unhedged exposures continue to be subject to currency fluctuations. In addition, the weakening or strengthening of the United States dollar results in favorable or unfavorable translation effects when the results of our foreign locations are translated into United States dollars for inclusion in our consolidated financial statements and results. BUSINESS AND OPERATIONAL RISKS Cost containment measures in the United States and other countries resulting in pricing pressures could have a negative impact on our future operating results. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. Pricing pressure has also increased in our markets due to continued consolidation among healthcare providers, trends toward managed care, the shift towards governments becoming the primary payers of healthcare expenses, and government laws and regulations relating to sales and promotion, reimbursement and pricing generally. Reductions in reimbursement levels or coverage for our products or other cost containment measures, including any that reduce medical procedure volumes, could unfavorably affect our future operating results. We may be unable to effectively develop and market products against the products of our competitors in a highly competitive industry. Our present or future products could be rendered obsolete or uneconomical by technological advances by our competitors. Competitive factors include price, customer service, technology, innovation, quality, reputation and reliability. Our competition may respond more quickly to new or emerging technologies, undertake more extensive marketing campaigns, have greater financial, marketing and other resources or be more successful in attracting potential customers, employees and strategic partners. Given these factors, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to continue our level of success in the industry. Competition in the development and improvement of new and existing products is particularly significant and results from time to time in product obsolescence. The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and new products and surgical procedures are introduced on an ongoing basis. Such marketplace changes may cause some of our products to become obsolete. If actual product life cycles, product demand or acceptance of new product introductions are less favorable than projected by management, a higher level of inventory write downs may result. We may be unable to maintain adequate working relationships with healthcare professionals. We seek to maintain close working relationships with respected physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist in product research and development. We rely on these professionals to assist us in the development of proprietary products and product improvements to complement and expand our existing product lines. If we are unable to maintain these relationships, our ability to develop, market and sell new and improved products could decrease. We are subject to additional risks associated with our extensive international operations. We develop, manufacture and distribute our products throughout the world. Our international operations are subject to a number of additional risks and potential costs, including changes in foreign medical reimbursement policies and programs, unexpected changes in foreign regulatory requirements, differing local product preferences and product requirements, diminished protection of intellectual property in some countries, trade protection measures and import or export licensing requirements, difficulty in staffing and managing foreign operations, political and economic instability. Our results of operations and or financial condition could be adversely impacted if we are unable to successfully manage these and other risks of international operations in an increasingly volatile environment. We may be unable to capitalize on previous or future acquisitions. In addition to internally developed products, we rely upon investment in new technologies through acquisitions. Investments in medical technology are inherently risky, and we cannot guarantee that any acquisition will be successful or will not have a material unfavorable impact on us. These risks include the activities required to integrate new businesses, which may result in the need to allocate more resources to integration and product development activities than originally anticipated, diversion of management time, which could adversely affect management's ability to focus on other projects, the inability to realize the expected benefits, savings or synergies from the acquisition, the loss of key personnel of the acquired company, and exposure to unexpected liabilities of the acquired company. In addition, we cannot be certain that the businesses we acquire will become profitable or remain so, which may result in unexpected impairment charges. 5 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2014 Form 10 K We may record future goodwill impairment charges related to 1 or more of our business units, which could materially adversely impact our results of operations. We perform our annual impairment test for goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if indicators are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist. In evaluating the potential for impairment we make assumptions regarding revenue projections, growth rates, cash flows, tax rates, and discount rates. These assumptions are uncertain and by nature may vary from actual results. A significant reduction in the estimated fair values could result in impairment charges that could materially affect our results of operations. Our results of operations could be negatively impacted by future changes in the allocation of income to each of the income tax jurisdictions in which we operate. We operate in multiple income tax jurisdictions both in the United States and internationally. Accordingly, our management must determine the appropriate allocation of income to each jurisdiction based on current interpretations of complex income tax regulations. Income tax authorities regularly perform audits of our income tax filings. Income tax audits associated with the allocation of income and other complex issues, including inventory transfer pricing and cost sharing, product royalty and foreign branch arrangements, may require an extended period of time to resolve and may result in significant income tax adjustments. If changes to the income allocation are required between jurisdictions with different income tax rates, the related adjustments could have a material unfavorable impact on our results of operations. Failure of a key information technology system, process or site could have a material adverse impact on our business. We rely extensively on information technology systems to conduct business. These systems include, but are not limited to, ordering and managing materials from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping products to customers, processing transactions, summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, providing data security and other processes necessary to manage our business. If our systems are damaged or cease to function properly due to any number of causes, ranging from catastrophic events to power outages to security breaches, and our business continuity plans do not effectively compensate on a timely basis, we may suffer interruptions in our operations. A breach of information security, including a cybersecurity breach or failure of 1 or more key information technology systems, ne2rks, processes, associated sites or service providers could have a material adverse impact on our business or reputation. We rely extensively on information technology (IT) systems, ne2rks and services, including internet sites, data hosting and processing facilities and tools and other hardware, software and technical applications and platforms, some of which are managed, hosted, provided and or used by third parties or their vendors, to assist in conducting our business. Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced persistent threats, pose a potential risk to the security of our IT systems, ne2rks and services, as well as the confidentiality, availability, integrity of our data and our responsibilities to governments. We have made investments seeking to address these threats, including monitoring of ne2rks and systems, hiring of experts, employee training and security policies for employees and third party providers. However, because the techniques used in these attacks change frequently and may be difficult to detect for periods of time, we may face difficulties in anticipating and implementing adequate preventative measures. If the IT systems, ne2rks or service providers we rely upon fail to function properly, or if we or 1 of our third party providers suffer a loss or disclosure of our business or stakeholder information, due to any number of causes, ranging from catastrophic events or power outages to improper data handling or security breaches, and our business continuity plans do not effectively address these failures on a timely basis, we may be exposed to reputational, competitive and business harm as well as litigation and regulatory action. The costs and operational consequences of responding to breaches and implementing remediation measures could be significant. We may be unable to attract and retain key employees. Our sales, technical and other key personnel play an integral role in the development, marketing and selling of new and existing products. If we are unable to recruit, hire, develop and retain a talented, competitive work force, we may not be able to meet our strategic business objectives. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES.
