CIK: 310764
Company Name: STRYKER CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2012-02-13
Accession Number: 0000310764-12-000031


ITEM 1 BUSINESS. General Stryker Corporation is 1 of the world's leading medical technology companies with 2011 revenues of $8,307 and net earnings of $1,345. Stryker's products include implants used in joint replacement and trauma surgeries; surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems; endoscopic and communications systems; patient handling and emergency medical equipment; neurosurgical, neurovascular and spinal devices; as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. As used herein, and except where the context otherwise requires, "Stryker," "we," "us," and "our" refer to Stryker Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. Stryker was incorporated in Michigan in 1946 as the successor company to a business founded in 1941 by Dr. Homer H. Stryker, a prominent orthopaedic surgeon and the inventor of several orthopaedic products. In the United States, most of our products are marketed directly to doctors, hospitals and other health care facilities. Internationally, our products are sold in over 100 countries through Company owned sales subsidiaries and branches as well as third party dealers and distributors. Business Segments and Geographic Information In 2011 we began segregating our reporting into 3 reportable business segments Reconstructive, MedSurg, and Neurotechnology and Spine. Financial information regarding our reportable business segments and certain geographic information is included under Results of Operations in Item 7 of this report and Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. We have restated prior period segment information to conform to the current presentation. Reconstructive Reconstructive products consist primarily of implants used in hip and knee joint replacements and trauma surgeries. Many of our technologically advanced reconstructive implants are suited to minimally invasive surgery procedures that are intended to reduce soft tissue damage and pain while hastening return to function. We support surgeons with technology, procedural development and specialized instrumentation as they develop new surgical techniques. In 2011 we received 510(k) approval to market our ShapeMatch Cutting Guides for use with our Triathlon Total Knee System. ShapeMatch technology utilizes proprietary 3D imaging software to develop a customized preoperative surgical plan for each patient and is available only for use with the Triathlon system. In 2011 we acquired Memometal Technologies, which develops, manufactures and markets products for extremity (hand and foot) indications that enhance the offerings in our trauma product line. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors in the United States for joint replacement products; the other four are DePuy Orthopaedics, Inc. (DePuy, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson), Zimmer Holdings, Inc. (Zimmer), Biomet, Inc. and Smith & Nephew plc. We are also a leading player in the international markets, with these same companies as our principal competitors. In trauma systems, we compete principally with Synthes, Inc., Smith & Nephew Orthopaedics (a division of Smith & Nephew plc), Zimmer and DePuy. MedSurg MedSurg products include surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems (Instruments); endoscopic and communications systems (Endoscopy); patient handling and emergency medical equipment (Medical); reprocessed and remanufactured medical devices; as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. In 2010 we acquired the assets used to produce the Sonopet Ultrasonic Aspirator control consoles, handpieces and accessories, which are used by surgeons to fragment soft and hard tissue for tumor removal and b1 cutting and have applications in our Instruments product line. In 2010 we acquired Gaymar Industries (Gaymar), which specializes in support surfaces and pressure ulcer management solutions as well as the temperature management segment of the healthcare industry. Gaymar enhances the offerings in our Medical product line. Stryker is 1 of 3 market leaders in Instruments, competing principally with Medtronic, Inc. and Conmed Linvatec, Inc. (a subsidiary of CONMED Corporation) globally; internationally, we also compete with Aesculap Werke AG (a division of B. Braun Melsungen AG). In Endoscopy, we compete with Smith & Nephew Endoscopy (a division of Smith & Nephew plc), ConMed Linvatec, Inc., Arthrex, Inc., Karl Storz GmbH & Co. and Olympus Optical Co. Ltd. Our primary competitors in Medical are Hill Rom Holdings, Inc., Hausted, Inc. (a subsidiary of STERIS Corporation), Midmark Hospital Products Group (a subsidiary of Ohio Medical Instrument Company, Inc.) and Ferno Washington, Inc. 1 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. Neurotechnology and Spine Our Neurotechnology and Spine products include a comprehensive portfolio of products including both neurosurgical and neurovascular devices. Our neurotechnology offering includes products used for minimally invasive endovascular techniques, as well as a comprehensive line of products for traditional brain and open skull base surgical procedures, orthobiologic and biosurgery products including synthetic b1 grafts and vertebral augmentation products, as well as minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. We also develop, manufacture and market spinal implant products including cervical, thoracolumbar and interbody systems used in spinal injury, deformity and degenerative therapies. In 2011 we acquired the assets of the Neurovascular division of Boston Scientific Corporation (Neurovascular), as well as Concentric Medical, Inc., a manufacturer of minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. These acquisitions complement our product offerings within our Neurovascular product line. In June 2011 we completed the acquisition of Orthovita, Inc. (Orthovita), a developer of orthobiologic and biosurgery products, including synthetic b1 grafts and vertebral augmentation products. The acquisition of Orthovita complements our existing product offerings, primarily within our Spine product line. Our primary competitors in neurotechnology are Covidien and Micrus Endovascular, LLC (a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson). We are 1 of four market leaders in spine products, along with Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc. (a subsidiary of Medtronic, Inc.), DePuy Spine, Inc. (a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson) and Synthes, Inc. Geographic Areas In 2011 approximately 63% of our revenues were generated from customers in the United States. Internationally, our products are sold in over 100 countries through local dealers and direct sales efforts. Additional geographic information is included under Results of Operations in Item 7 of this report and Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Raw Materials and Inventory Raw materials essential to our business are generally readily available from multiple sources. Substantially all products we manufacture are stocked in inventory, while certain MedSurg products are assembled to order. The dollar amount of backlog orders at any given time is not considered to be significant. Patents and Trademarks Patents and trademarks are significant to our business to the extent that a product or an attribute of a product represents a unique design or process. Patent protection of such products restricts competitors from duplicating these unique designs and features. We seek to obtain patent protection on our products whenever appropriate for protecting our competitive advantage. As of December 31, 2011, we own approximately 1,456 United States patents and 2,579 international patents. Seasonality Our business is generally not seasonal in nature; however, the number of reconstructive implant surgeries is generally lower during the summer months. Competition In all of our product lines, we compete with local and global companies located throughout the world. Competition exists in all product lines without regard to the number and size of the competing companies involved. The development of new and innovative products is important to our success in all areas of our business and competition in research, involving the development and the improvement of new and existing products and processes, is particularly significant. The competitive environment requires substantial investments in continuing research and in maintaining sales forces. The principal factors that we believe differentiate us in the highly competitive product categories in which we operate and enable us to compete effectively include our commitment to innovation and quality, service and reputation. We believe that our competitive position in the future will depend to a large degree on our ability to develop new products and make improvements to existing products. Product Development Most of our products and product improvements, with the exception of our neurotechnology products, have been developed internally at research facilities located in manufacturing locations in the United States, Ireland, Puerto Rico, Germany, Switzerland and France. We also invest through acquisitions in technologies developed by third parties that have the potential to expand the markets in which we operate. We maintain close working relationships with physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist us in product development efforts. The total costs of worldwide Company sponsored research, development and engineering activities 2 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. relating to the development of new products, improvement of existing products, technical support of products and compliance with governmental regulations for the protection of customers and patients were $462, $394 and $336 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Research, development and engineering expenses represented 5.6% of sales, 5.4% of sales and 5.0% of sales in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Regulation Most of our businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in which operations are conducted, and the general trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. In the United States, the Medical Device Amendments of 1976 to the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990, and the regulations issued or proposed thereunder, provide for regulation by the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, including most of our products. Most of our new products fall into FDA classifications that require notification of and review by the FDA before marketing, submitted as a 510(k). Certain of our products require extensive clinical testing, consisting of safety and efficacy studies, followed by pre market approval applications for specific surgical indications. The FDA's Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our facilities by the FDA. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacturing and marketing of our products. We have previously been subject to warning letters issued by the FDA but all warning letters have been resolved as of May 10, 2010 and n1 are currently outstanding. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directives that form a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to obtain CE Marking for their products. We have authorization to apply the CE Marking to substantially all of our products. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare expenses generally and hospital costs in particular, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. It is not possible to predict at this time the long term impact of such cost containment measures on our future business. In addition, business practices in the health care industry have come under increased scrutiny, particularly in the United States, by government agencies and state attorneys general, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties. Employees At December 31, 2011, we had approximately 21,241 employees worldwide. Certain international employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain positive relationships with our employees worldwide. Executive Officers of the Registrant Information regarding our executive officers appears under the caption "Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance" in Item 10 of this Report. Available Information Our main corporate website address is www.stryker.com. Copies of our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Annual Report on Form 10 K and Current Reports on Form 8 K filed or furnished to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request to the Secretary at our principal executive offices. All of our SEC filings are also available free of charge on our website within the "Investor SEC Filings & Ownership Reports" link as soon as reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. All SEC filings are also available at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov . ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS. This report contains statements referring to us that are not historical facts and are considered forward looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are intended to take advantage of the safe harbor provisions of the Reform Act, are based on current projections about operations, industry conditions, financial condition and liquidity. Words that identify forward looking statements include words such as may, could, will, should, possible, plan, predict, forecast, potential, anticipate, estimate, expect, project, intend, believe, may impact, on track, and words and terms of similar substance used in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance, a merger, or our businesses. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of future events or 3 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward looking statements. Those statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results could differ materially and adversely from these forward looking statements. Some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward looking statements include those risks discussed below. Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition or results of operations, We may be unable to effectively develop and market products against those of our competitors in a highly competitive industry. Our present or future products could be rendered obsolete or uneconomical by technological advances by 1 or more of our present or future competitors. Competitive factors include price, customer service, technology, innovation, quality, reputation and reliability. Our competition may respond more quickly to new or emerging technologies, undertake more extensive marketing campaigns, have greater financial, marketing and other resources than us or may be more successful in attracting potential customers, employees and strategic partners. Given these factors, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to continue our level of success in the industry. Competition in research, involving development and the improvement of new and existing products, is particularly significant and results from time to time in product obsolescence. The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and new products and surgical procedures are introduced on an ongoing basis. Such marketplace changes may cause some of our products to become obsolete. If actual product life cycles, product demand or acceptance of new product introductions are less favorable than projected by management, a higher level of inventory write downs may result. Dependence on patent and other proprietary rights and failing to protect such rights or to be successful in litigation related to such rights may result in our payment of significant m1tary damages or impact offerings in our product portfolios. Our long term success largely depends on our ability to market technologically competitive products. If we fail to obtain or maintain adequate intellectual property protection, we may not be able to prevent third parties from using our proprietary technologies or may lose access to technologies critical to our products. Also, our currently pending or future patent applications may not result in issued patents, and issued patents are subject to claims concerning priority, scope and other issues. Intellectual property litigation and infringement claims could cause us to incur significant expenses or prevent us from selling certain of our products. The medical device industry is characterized by extensive intellectual property litigation and, from time to time, we are the subject of claims by third parties of potential infringement or misappropriation. Regardless of outcome, such claims are expensive to defend and divert the time and effort of our management and operating personnel from other business issues. A successful claim or claims of patent or other intellectual property infringement against us could result in our payment of significant m1tary damages and or royalty payments or negatively impact our ability to sell current or future products in the affected category and could have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flows, financial condition or results of operations. We are subject to extensive governmental regulations relating to the manufacturing, labeling and marketing of our products. Substantially all of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other governmental authorities both inside and outside of the United States. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a medical device can be costly and time consuming and approvals might not be granted for future products on a timely basis, if at all. In addition, if we fail to comply with applicable regulatory requirements, we may be subject to a range of sanctions including warning letters, m1tary fines, product recalls and the suspension of product manufacturing, and criminal prosecution. Healthcare changes in the United States and other countries resulting in pricing pressures could have a negative impact on our future operating results. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. Pricing pressure has also increased in our markets due to continued consolidation among health care providers, trends toward managed care, the shift towards governments becoming the primary payers of health care expenses, and government laws and regulations relating to reimbursement and pricing generally. Reductions in reimbursement levels or coverage or other cost containment measures could unfavorably affect our future operating results. The impact of United States healthcare reform legislation on us remains uncertain. In 2010 federal legislation to reform the United States healthcare system was enacted into law. The legislation is far reaching and is intended to expand access to health insurance coverage, improve quality and reduce costs over time. We expect the new law will have a significant impact upon various aspects of our business operations. However, it is unclear how the new law will impact patient access to new technologies or reimbursement rates under the Medicare program. In addition, the new law imposes a 23 percent excise tax on medical devices scheduled to be implemented in 2013 that will apply to United States sales of a majority of our medical device products. Many of the details of the new law will be included in new and revised regulations, which have not yet been promulgated, and require additional guidance and specificity to be provided by the Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Labor and Department of the Treasury. Accordingly, while it is too early to understand and predict the ultimate impact of the new law on our business, the 4 legislation could have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations. We may be adversely affected by product liability claims, unfavorable court decisions or legal settlements. We are defendants in various proceedings, legal actions and claims arising in the normal course of business, including product liability and other matters. These matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable. In addition, we may incur significant legal expenses regardless of whether we are found to be liable. To partially mitigate losses arising from unfavorable outcomes in such matters, we purchase third party insurance coverage subject to certain retentions, deductibles and loss limitations. While we believe our current insurance coverage is adequate to mitigate losses arising from such matters, we may be adversely impacted by any settlement payments or losses beyond the amounts of insurance carried or for which coverage is otherwise not available. In addition, even if covered by insurance, such losses may negatively impact our ability to obtain third party insurance coverage in future periods on a cost effective basis or at all. We may be unable to maintain adequate working relationships with healthcare professionals. We seek to maintain close working relationships with respected physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist in product research and development. We rely on these professionals to assist us in the development of proprietary products and product improvements to complement and expand our existing product lines. If we are unable to maintain these relationships, our ability to develop, market and sell new and improved products could decrease and future operating results could be unfavorably affected. We are subject to additional risks associated with our extensive international operations. We develop, manufacture and distribute our products throughout the world. Our international operations are, and will continue to be, subject to a number of additional risks and potential costs, including changes in foreign medical reimbursement policies and programs, unexpected changes in foreign regulatory requirements, differing local product preferences and product requirements, diminished protection of intellectual property in some countries outside of the United States, trade protection measures and import or export licensing requirements, extraterritorial effects of United States laws such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, difficulty in staffing and managing foreign operations, and political and economic instability. Exposure to exchange rate fluctuations on cross border transactions and translation of local currency results into United States dollars could have a significant impact on the reported results of our operations, which are presented in United States dollars . Cross border transactions, both with external parties and intercompany relationships, result in increased exposure to foreign exchange effects. Accordingly, significant changes in currency exchange rates could negatively affect our results of operations. In addition, our sales are translated into United States dollars for reporting purposes. The strengthening or weakening of the United States dollar could result in favorable or unfavorable translation effects as the results of foreign locations are translated into United States dollars. Our operating results could be negatively impacted by future changes in the allocation of income to each of the income tax jurisdictions in which we operate. We operate in multiple income tax jurisdictions both inside and outside the United States. Accordingly, our management must determine the appropriate allocation of income to each of these jurisdictions based on current interpretations of complex income tax regulations. Income tax authorities in these jurisdictions regularly perform audits of our income tax filings. Income tax audits associated with the allocation of this income and other complex issues, including inventory transfer pricing and cost sharing, product royalty and foreign branch arrangements, may require an extended period of time to resolve and may result in significant income tax adjustments. If changes to the income allocation are required between jurisdictions with different income tax rates, such adjustments could have a material unfavorable impact on our income tax expense and net earnings. We may be unable to capitalize on previous or future acquisitions. In addition to internally developed products, we rely upon investment in new technologies through acquisitions. Investments in medical technology are inherently risky, and we cannot guarantee that any acquisition will be successful or will not have a material unfavorable impact on us. These risks include the activities required by us to integrate new businesses, which may result in the need to allocate more resources to integration and product development activities than originally anticipated, diversion of management's time, which could adversely affect management's ability to focus on other projects, the inability to realize the expected benefits, savings or synergies from the acquisition, the loss of key personnel of the acquired company, and exposure to unexpected liabilities of the acquired company. In addition, we cannot be certain that the businesses we acquire will become profitable or remain so, which may result in unexpected impairment charges. Failure of a key information technology system, process or site could have a material adverse impact on our business. We rely extensively on information technology systems to conduct business. These systems include, but are not limited to, ordering and managing materials from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping products to customers, processing transactions, summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, providing data security and other processes necessary to manage our business. If our systems are damaged or cease to function properly due to any number of causes, ranging from catastrophic events to power outages to security breaches, and our business continuity plans do not effectively compensate on a timely basis, we may suffer interruptions in our ability to manage operations, which may adversely impact our business, cash flows, financial conditions or results of operations. We may be unable to attract and retain key employees . Our sales, technical and other key personnel play an integral role in the 5 development, marketing and selling of new and existing products. If we are unable to recruit, hire, develop and retain a talented, competitive work force, we may not be able to meet our strategic business objectives. Macroeconomic developments, such as the recent recessions in Europe and the debt crisis in certain countries in the European Union, could negatively affect our ability to conduct business in those geographies. The continuing debt crisis in certain European countries could cause the value of the euro to deteriorate, reducing the purchasing power of our European customers. Financial difficulties experienced by our suppliers and customers, including distributors, could result in product delays and inventory issues; risks to accounts receivable could also include delays in collection and greater bad debt expense. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES.
