CIK: 310764
Company Name: STRYKER CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2016-02-11
Accession Number: 0000310764-16-000226


ITEM 1 BUSINESS. General Stryker Corporation is a global leader in medical technology with 2015 revenues of $9,946 and net earnings of $1,439. Stryker's products include implants used in joint replacement and trauma surgeries; surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems; endoscopic and communications systems; patient handling and emergency medical equipment; neurosurgical, neurovascular and spinal devices; as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. Stryker was incorporated in Michigan in 1946 as the successor company to a business founded in 1941 by Dr. Homer H. Stryker, a prominent orthopaedic surgeon and the inventor of several orthopaedic products. In the United States most of Stryker's products are marketed directly to doctors, hospitals and other healthcare facilities. Stryker's products are sold in over 100 countries through company owned sales subsidiaries and branches as well as third party dealers and distributors. As used herein, and except where the context otherwise requires, "Stryker," "we," "us," and "our" refer to Stryker Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. Business Segments and Geographic Information We segregate our operations into 3 reportable business segments Orthopaedics, MedSurg, and Neurotechnology and Spine. Financial information regarding our reportable business segments and certain geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Net Sales by Reportable Segment 2015 2014 2013 Orthopaedics $ 4,223 43 % $ 4,153 43 % $ 3,949 44 % MedSurg 3,895 39 3,781 39 3,414 38 Neurotechnology and Spine 1,828 18 1,741 18 1,658 18 Total $ 9,946 100 % $ 9,675 100 % $ 9,021 100 % Orthopaedics Orthopaedics products consist primarily of implants used in hip and knee joint replacements and trauma and extremities surgeries. We bring patients and physicians advanced implant designs and specialized instrumentation that make orthopaedic surgery and recovery simpler, faster and more effective. We support surgeons with the technology and services they need as they develop new surgical techniques. Stryker is 1 of four leading competitors globally for joint replacement and trauma products; the other 3 being Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc. (Zimmer), DePuy Synthes (companies of Johnson & Johnson) and Smith & Nephew plc (Smith & Nephew). Composition of Net Sales 2015 2014 2013 Knees $ 1,403 33 % $ 1,396 34 % $ 1,371 35 % Hips 1,263 30 1,291 31 1,272 32 Trauma and Extremities 1,291 31 1,230 30 1,116 28 Other 266 6 236 5 190 5 Total $ 4,223 100 % $ 4,153 100 % $ 3,949 100 % In 2015 we received clearance by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for our Mako total knee application. This expands our Mako product offerings of partial knee and total hip applications to provide a comprehensive solution in the robotic arm assisted reconstructive surgery line. In 2014 we acquired certain assets of Small B1 Innovations, Inc. (SBi). SBi products are designed and promoted for upper and lower extremity small b1 indications, with a focus on small joint replacement. In 2012 we voluntarily recalled our Rejuvenate and ABG II Modular Neck hip stems and terminated global distribution of these hip products. In November 2014 we entered into a settlement agreement to compensate eligible United States patients who had surgery to replace their Rejuvenate and ABG II Modular Neck hip stems, known as a "revision surgery", prior to November 3, 2014. To date we have recorded charges to earnings totaling $1,824 ($2,056 before $232 of insurance recoveries) representing the actuarially determined low end of the range of probable loss to resolve this entire matter globally. In 2015 we made recall related payments of $1,202 to eligible United States patients who had revision surgery to replace their Rejuvenate and or ABG II Modular Neck hip stem as part of the settlement agreement. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for further information. MedSurg MedSurg products include surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems (Instruments); endoscopic and communications systems (Endoscopy); patient handling and emergency medical equipment (Medical); and reprocessed and remanufactured medical devices (Sustainability) as well as other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors globally in Instruments; the other four being Zimmer, Medtronic plc., Johnson & Johnson and ConMed Linvatec, Inc. (a subsidiary of CONMED Corporation). In Endoscopy we compete with Smith & Nephew, ConMed Linvatec, Arthrex, Inc., Karl Storz GmbH & Co., Olympus Optical Co. Ltd and Steris. Our primary competitor in Medical is Hill Rom Holdings, Inc. Composition of Net Sales 2015 2014 2013 Instruments $ 1,466 38 % $ 1,424 38 % $ 1,269 37 % Endoscopy 1,390 36 1,382 37 1,222 36 Medical 823 21 766 20 710 21 Sustainability 216 5 209 5 213 6 Total $ 3,895 100 % $ 3,781 100 % $ 3,414 100 % In 2015 we acquired CHG Hospital Beds, Inc. ("CHG"). CHG designs, manufactures and markets low height hospital beds and related accessories. In 2015 Instruments launched the Signature Drill Portfolio, the next generation neurosurgical high speed drill platform. The Signature Drill Portfolio allows surgeons to customize their preferences from 3 new motors, four new attachment lines, I.D. Touch Software, tunable drive technology, new cutting accessories, and a variety of user preferences to configure their Signature custom fit drill. Endoscopy launched the 1588 AIM Platform which is the first visualization system to seamlessly integrate five unique imaging modalities into 1 platform designed to enhance visualization of patient anatomy across multiple surgical specialties. Medical launched the TruRize clinical chair which is designed to promote early patient mobility and safe patient handling. 1 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2015 Form 10 K In 2014 we acquired Berchtold Holding, AG (Berchtold). Berchtold sells surgical tables, equipment booms and surgical lighting systems. In 2014 we acquired Patient Safety Technologies, Inc. (PST). PST proprietary Safety Sponge System and SurgiCount 360 compliance software helps to prevent Retained Foreign Objects in the operating room. Other acquisitions in 2014 include the acquisition of Pivot Medical, Inc. (Pivot). Pivot develops and sells innovative products for hip arthroscopy. Neurotechnology and Spine Neurotechnology and Spine products include both neurosurgical and neurovascular devices. Our neurotechnology offering includes products used for minimally invasive endovascular techniques; a comprehensive line of products for traditional brain and open skull base surgical procedures; orthobiologic and biosurgery products, including synthetic b1 grafts and vertebral augmentation products; and minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Our spinal implant offering includes cervical, thoracolumbar and interbody systems used in spinal injury, deformity and degenerative therapies. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors globally in Neurotechnology; the other four being Medtronic, Johnson & Johnson, Terumo Corporation, and Penumbra, Inc. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors globally in Spine; the other four being MedTronic Sofamor Danek, Inc. (a subsidiary of Medtronic), DePuy Synthes, Nuvasive, Inc. and Globus Medical, Inc. Composition of Net Sales 2015 2014 2013 Neurotechnology $ 1,088 60 % $ 1,001 57 % $ 915 55 % Spine 740 40 740 43 743 45 Total $ 1,828 100 % $ 1,741 100 % $ 1,658 100 % In 2015 the New England Journal of Medicine released results of a study finding that intra arterial treatment to remove stroke causing blood clots provides better outcomes than using a clot dissolving drug. 1 of the devices used in this study was our Trevo Retriever. Medical professionals in the field believe that the study's results will change the practice of acute stroke treatments. Stryker's Trevo Retriever is a leading device in the market that allows physicians to visualize blood clot interaction during treatment. Geographic Areas In 2015 approximately 715% of our revenues were generated from customers in the United States. Additional geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Raw Materials and Inventory Raw materials essential to our business are generally readily available from multiple sources. Substantially all products we manufacture are stocked in inventory, while certain MedSurg products are assembled to order. The dollar amount of backlog orders at any given time is not considered material to an understanding of our business taken as a whole. Patents and Trademarks Patents and trademarks are significant to our business to the extent that a product or an attribute of a product represents a unique design or process. Patent protection of such products restricts competitors from duplicating these unique designs and features. We seek to obtain patent protection on our products whenever appropriate for protecting our competitive advantage. On December 31, 2015 we owned approximately 1,884 United States patents and approximately 3,014 international patents. Seasonality Our business is generally not seasonal in nature; however, the number of orthopaedic implant surgeries is typically lower during the summer months, and sales of capital equipment are generally higher in the fourth quarter. Competition In all of our product lines we compete with local and global companies. Competition exists in all product lines without regard to the number and size of the competing companies involved. The development of new and innovative products is important to our success in all areas of our business and competition in research, involving the development and the improvement of new and existing products and processes, is particularly significant. The competitive environment requires substantial investments in continuing research and in maintaining sales forces. The principal factors that we believe differentiate us in the highly competitive product categories in which we operate and enable us to compete effectively include our commitment to innovation and quality, service and reputation. We believe that our competitive position in the future will depend to a large degree on our ability to develop new products and make improvements to existing products. Product Development Most of our products and product improvements have been developed internally at research facilities in the United States, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Puerto Rico and Switzerland. We also invest through acquisitions in technologies developed by third parties that have the potential to expand the markets in which we operate. We maintain close working relationships with physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist us in product development efforts. The total costs of research, development and engineering activities were $625, $614, and $536 in 2015, 2014 and 2013 Regulation Our businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in which we operate, and the general trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. In the United States the Medical Device Amendments of 1976 to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and its subsequent amendments, and the regulations issued and proposed thereunder, provide for regulation by the FDA of the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, including most of our products. Many of our new products fall into FDA classifications that require notification submitted as a 510(k) and review by the FDA before we begin marketing them. Certain of our products require extensive clinical testing, consisting of safety and efficacy studies, followed by pre market approval (PMA) applications for specific surgical indications. The FDA's Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our facilities by the FDA. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacture and marketing of our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directives that form a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to meet certain quality system requirements and obtain CE marking for their products. We have authorization to apply the CE marking to substantially all of our products. In addition, we comply with the 2 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2015 Form 10 K unique regulatory requirements of each of the countries in Europe and other countries in which we market our products. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare expenses generally and hospital costs in particular, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. It is not possible to predict at this time the long term impact of such cost containment measures on our future business. In addition, business practices in the healthcare industry are scrutinized, particularly in the United States, by federal and state government agencies, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties. Employees On December 31, 2015 we had approximately 27,000 employees globally. Certain international employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain positive relationships with our employees globally. Executive Officers on January 31, 2016 Name Age First Became an Executive Officer Kevin A. Lobo 50 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 2011 Yin C. Becker 52 Vice President of Communication and Public Affairs 2016 William E. Berry Jr. 50 Vice President, Corporate Controller and Principal Accounting Officer 2014 Lonny J. Carpenter 54 Group President, Global Quality and Business Operations 2008 M. Kathryn Fink 46 Vice President, Global Human Resources 2016 David K. Floyd 55 Group President, Orthopaedics 2012 Michael D. Hutchinson 45 General Counsel 2014 William R. Jellison 58 Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 2013 Katherine A. Owen 45 Vice President, Strategy and Investor Relations 2007 Bijoy S.N. Sagar 47 Vice President, Chief Information Officer 2014 Timothy J. Scannell 51 Group President, MedSurg and Neurotechnology 2008 Each of our executive officers was elected by our Board of Directors to serve in the office indicated until the first meeting of the Board of Directors following the annual meeting of shareholders in 2016 or until a successor is chosen and qualified or until his or her resignation or removal. Each of our executive officers has held the position above or has served Stryker in various executive or administrative capacities for at least five years, except for Mr. Lobo, Mr. Berry, Mr. Floyd, Ms. Fink, Mr. Jellison and Mr. Sagar. Prior to joining Stryker in April 2011, Mr. Lobo held a variety of senior level leadership roles for the previous nine years at Johnson & Johnson, most recently as Worldwide President of Ethicon Endo Surgery. Prior to joining Stryker in August 2011, Mr. Berry served for 2 years as Assistant Corporate Controller for Whirlpool Corporation, the world's leading manufacturer and marketer of major home appliances, and before that held a variety of senior finance roles at Delphi Automotive and Federal Mogul Corporation, both global automotive parts manufacturers. Mr. Floyd was the Chief Executive Officer for OrthoWorx and held a variety of senior level leadership roles with DePuy Synthes, Abbott Spine, AxioMed Spine, and Centerpulse Orthopaedics. Prior to joining Stryker in October 2013, Ms. Fink held a variety of senior level human resources roles for the previous six years at Johnson & Johnson, most recently as the Worldwide Vice President, Human Resources of Ethicon. While at Stryker, Ms. Fink held 2 different senior level Human Resource roles. Prior to joining Stryker in April 2013, Mr. Jellison was Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at Dentsply International, the world's largest manufacturer of professional dental products, and before that held a variety of senior level leadership roles over a 15 year period at Dentsply. Prior to joining Stryker in May 2014, Mr. Sagar served as the Chief Information officer for Merck Millipore, and before that as Global Head of Information Systems and a member of the divisional board for the chemicals division of Merck KGaA. Prior to joining Stryker in November 2012, On December 31, 2015 Ramesh Subrahmanian stepped down from his role as International Group President. On January 26, 2016 we announced that Mr. Jellison has elected to retire from his role as Vice President, Chief Financial Officer effective April 1, 2016. Glenn S. Boehnlein, who has served as Group Vice President, Chief Financial Officer for MedSurg & Neurotechnology since 2011, has been promoted to Vice President, Chief Financial Officer effective April 1, 2016. Before his role as Group Vice President, Chief Financial Officer for MedSurg & Neurotechnology, Mr. Boehnlein held a variety of senior finance roles in the MedSurg & Neurotechnology group. Available Information Our main corporate website address is www.stryker.com. Copies of our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Annual Reports on Form 10 K and Current Reports on Form 8 K filed or furnished to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request to our Corporate Secretary at our principal executive offices. All of our SEC filings are also available free of charge on our website within the "For Investors SEC Filings & Ownership Reports" link as soon as reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. All SEC filings are also available at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov . ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS. This report contains statements referring to us that are not historical facts and are considered "forward looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are intended to take advantage of the "safe harbor" provisions of the Reform Act, are based on current projections about operations, industry conditions, financial condition and liquidity. Words that identify forward looking statements include words such as "may," "could," "will," "should," "possible," "plan," "predict," "forecast," "potential," "anticipate," "estimate," "expect," "project," "intend," "believe," "may impact," "on track," and words and terms of similar substance used in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance, an acquisition or our businesses. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward looking statements. Those statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results could differ materially and adversely from these forward looking statements. Some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward looking statements include the risks discussed below. Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations. Additional risks and 3 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2015 Form 10 K uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial may also materially and adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition or results of operations. LEGAL AND REGULATORY RISKS The impact of United States healthcare reform legislation on our business remains uncertain In 2010 federal legislation to reform the United States healthcare system was enacted into law. The legislation is far reaching and is intended to expand access to health insurance coverage and improve the quality and reduce the costs of healthcare over time. We expect the law will have a significant impact upon various aspects of our business operations. Among other things, the law imposed a 23 percent excise tax on medical devices that applies only to United States sales, which are a majority of our medical device products sales; however, in 2015 Congress enacted legislation that suspends the excise tax for 2016 and 2017. Other provisions of this legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at improving quality and decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, could meaningfully change the way healthcare is developed and delivered. Further, we cannot predict what other healthcare programs and regulations will be ultimately implemented at the federal or state level or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the United States on our business and results of operations. We may be adversely affected by product liability claims, unfavorable court decisions or legal settlements We are exposed to potential product liability risks that are inherent in the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, many of which are intended to be implanted in the human body for long periods of time or indefinitely. We are currently defendants in a number of product liability matters, including those relating to our Rejuvenate and ABGII Modular Neck hip stems discussed in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. These matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable. In addition, we may incur significant legal expenses regardless of whether we are found to be liable. We are self insured for product liability related claims and expenses. The ultimate cost to us with respect to product liability claims could be materially different than the amount of the current estimates and accruals and could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Intellectual property litigation and infringement claims could cause us to incur significant expenses or prevent us from selling certain of our products The medical device industry is characterized by extensive intellectual property litigation and, from time to time, we are the subject of claims of potential infringement or misappropriation. Regardless of outcome, such claims are expensive to defend and divert the time and effort of management and operating personnel from other business issues. A successful claim or claims of patent or other intellectual property infringement against us could result in payment of significant m1tary damages and or royalty payments or negatively impact our ability to sell current or future products in the affected category. Dependence on patent and other proprietary rights and failing to protect such rights or to be successful in litigation related to such rights may impact offerings in our product portfolios Our long term success largely depends on our ability to market technologically competitive products. If we fail to obtain or maintain adequate intellectual property protection, it could allow others to sell products that directly compete with proprietary features in our product portfolio. Also, our issued patents are subject to claims concerning priority, scope and other issues, and currently pending or future patent applications may not result in issued patents. We are subject to extensive governmental regulation relating to the manufacturing, labeling and marketing of our products Substantially all of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other governmental authorities in the United States and internationally. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a medical device can be costly and time consuming and approvals might not be granted timely for future products, if at all. We have ongoing responsibilities under FDA regulations with respect to our products and facilities and are subject to periodic inspections by the FDA and others to determine compliance with the quality system and medical device reporting regulations and other requirements. If we fail to fully comply with applicable regulatory requirements, we may be subject to a range of sanctions, including warning letters, product recalls, the suspension of product manufacturing, m1tary fines and criminal prosecution. We are subject to federal, state and foreign healthcare regulations, including fraud and abuse laws, as well as anti bribery laws, and could face substantial penalties if we fail to fully comply with such regulations and laws Our relationships with healthcare professionals, such as physicians, hospitals and those that may market our products, are subject to scrutiny under various state and federal laws often referred to collectively as healthcare fraud and abuse laws. In addition, the United States and foreign government regulators have increased the enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and other anti bribery laws. These laws are broad in scope and are subject to evolving interpretation, which could require us to incur substantial costs to monitor compliance or to alter our practices if we are found not to be in compliance. We also must comply with a variety of other laws that protect the privacy of individually identifiable healthcare information and impose extensive tracking and reporting related to all transfers of value provided to certain healthcare professionals. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal or civil sanctions, including substantial fines, imprisonment and exclusion from participation in governmental healthcare programs. MARKET RISKS Macroeconomic developments could negatively affect our ability to conduct business in affected regions Financial difficulties experienced by our customers, distributors, and suppliers could result in product delays and inventory issues; risks to accounts receivable could also include delays in collection and greater bad debt expense. Exposure to exchange rate fluctuations on cross border transactions and translation of local currency results into United States dollars We report our financial results in United States Dollars and approximately 30% of our revenues are denominated in foreign currencies, including the Euro, the British Pound, and the Japanese Yen. Cross border transactions with external parties and intercompany relationships result in increased exposure to foreign currency exchange effects. Our results of operations and, in some cases, cash flows, have been and may in the future be adversely affected by movements in foreign currency exchange rates. While we implement currency hedges to partially reduce our exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates; our hedging strategies may not be successful, and our unhedged exposures continue to be subject to currency fluctuations. In addition, the weakening or strengthening of the United States dollar results in favorable or unfavorable translation effects when the results of our foreign locations are translated into United States dollars for inclusion in our consolidated financial statements and results. 4 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2015 Form 10 K Additional capital that we may require in the future may not be available to us, or only available to us on unfavorable terms Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including operating requirements, current and future acquisitions and the need to refinance existing debt. Our ability to issue additional debt or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected by our debt levels, unfavorable changes in economic conditions generally or uncertainties that affect the capital markets. Changes in credit ratings issued by nationally recognized credit rating agencies could also adversely affect our access to and cost of financing. Higher borrowing costs or the inability to access capital markets could adversely affect our ability to support future growth and operating requirements and, as a result, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected. BUSINESS AND OPERATIONAL RISKS Cost containment measures in the United States and other countries resulting in pricing pressures could have a negative impact on our future operating results Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. Pricing pressure has also increased due to continued consolidation among healthcare providers, trends toward managed care, the shift towards governments becoming the primary payers of healthcare expenses and government laws and regulations relating to sales and promotion, reimbursement and pricing generally. Reductions in reimbursement levels or coverage for our products or other cost containment measures, including any that reduce medical procedure volumes, could unfavorably affect our future operating results. We may be unable to effectively develop and market products against the products of our competitors in a highly competitive industry Our present or future products could be rendered obsolete or uneconomical by technological advances by our competitors. Competitive factors include price, customer service, technology, innovation, quality, reputation and reliability. Our competition may respond more quickly to new or emerging technologies, undertake more extensive marketing campaigns, have greater financial, marketing and other resources or be more successful in attracting potential customers, employees and strategic partners. Given these factors, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to continue our level of success in the industry. Competition in the development and improvement of new and existing products is particularly significant and results from time to time in product obsolescence The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and new products and surgical procedures are introduced on an ongoing basis. Such marketplace changes may cause some of our products to become obsolete. If actual product life cycles, product demand or acceptance of new product introductions are less favorable than projected by management, a higher level of inventory write downs may result. We may be unable to maintain adequate working relationships with healthcare professionals We seek to maintain close working relationships with respected physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist in product research and development. We rely on these professionals to assist us in the development of proprietary products and product improvements to complement and expand our existing product lines. If we are unable to maintain these relationships, our ability to develop, market and sell new and improved products could decrease. We are subject to additional risks associated with our extensive international operations We develop, manufacture and distribute our products globally. Our international operations are subject to a number of additional risks and potential costs, including changes in foreign medical reimbursement policies and programs, unexpected changes in foreign regulatory requirements, differing local product preferences and product requirements, diminished protection of intellectual property in some countries, trade protection measures and import or export licensing requirements, difficulty in staffing and managing foreign operations, political and economic instability. Our results of operations and or financial condition could be adversely impacted if we are unable to successfully manage these and other risks of international operations in an increasingly volatile environment. We may be unable to capitalize on previous or future acquisitions In addition to internally developed products, we rely upon investment in new technologies through acquisitions. Investments in medical technology are inherently risky, and we cannot guarantee that any acquisition will be successful or will not have a material unfavorable impact on us. These risks include the activities required to integrate new businesses, which may result in the need to allocate more resources to integration and product development activities than originally anticipated, diversion of management time, which could adversely affect management's ability to focus on other projects, the inability to realize the expected benefits, savings or synergies from the acquisition, the loss of key personnel of the acquired company and exposure to unexpected liabilities of the acquired company. In addition, we cannot be certain that the businesses we acquire will become profitable or remain so, which may result in unexpected impairment charges. We may record future goodwill impairment charges related to 1 or more of our business units, which could materially adversely impact our results of operations We perform our annual impairment test for goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if indicators are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist. In evaluating the potential for impairment we make assumptions regarding revenue projections, growth rates, cash flows, tax rates and discount rates. These assumptions are uncertain and by nature may vary from actual results. A significant reduction in the estimated fair values could result in impairment charges that could materially affect our results of operations. Our results of operations could be negatively impacted by future changes in the allocation of income to each of the income tax jurisdictions in which we operate We operate in multiple income tax jurisdictions both in the United States and internationally. Accordingly, our management must determine the appropriate allocation of income to each jurisdiction based on current interpretations of complex income tax regulations. Income tax authorities regularly perform audits of our income tax filings. Income tax audits associated with the allocation of income and other complex issues, including inventory transfer pricing and cost sharing, product royalty and foreign branch arrangements, may require an extended period of time to resolve and may result in significant income tax adjustments. If changes to the income allocation are required between jurisdictions with different income tax rates, the related adjustments could have a material unfavorable impact on our results of operations. Failure of a key information technology system, process or site and a breach of information security, including a cybersecurity breach or failure of 1 or more key information technology systems, ne2rks, processes, associated sites or service providers could have a material adverse impact on our business or reputation We rely extensively on information technology (IT) systems to conduct business. These systems include, but are not limited to, ordering and managing materials 5 Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. STRYKER CORPORATION 2015 Form 10 K from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping products to customers, processing transactions, summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, providing data security and other processes necessary to manage our business. In addition, our reliance on ne2rks and services, including internet sites, data hosting and processing facilities and tools and other hardware, software and technical applications and platforms, some of which are managed, hosted, provided and or used by third parties or their vendors, to assist in conducting our business. Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats, including advanced persistent threats, pose a potential risk to the security of our IT systems, ne2rks and services, as well as the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and our responsibilities to governments. We have made investments seeking to address these threats, including monitoring of ne2rks and systems, hiring of experts, employee training and security policies for employees and third party providers; however, because the techniques used in these attacks change frequently and may be difficult to detect for periods of time, we may face difficulties in anticipating and implementing adequate preventative measures. If the IT systems are damaged or cease to function properly due to any number of causes, ne2rks or service providers we rely upon fail to function properly, or if we or 1 of our third party providers suffer a loss or disclosure of our business or stakeholder information, due to any number of causes, ranging from catastrophic events or power outages to improper data handling or security breaches, and our business continuity plans do not effectively address these failures on a timely basis, we may be exposed to reputational, competitive and business harm as well as litigation and regulatory action. The costs and operational consequences of interruptions in our operations and responding to breaches and implementing remediation measures could be significant. We may be unable to attract and retain key employees Our sales, technical and other key personnel play an integral role in the development, marketing and selling of new and existing products. If we are unable to recruit, hire, develop and retain a talented, competitive work force, we may not be able to meet our strategic business objectives. An inability to successfully manage the implementation of a new global enterprise resource planning ("ERP") system could adversely affect our operations and operating results We are in the process of implementing a new global ERP system. This system will replace many of our existing operating and financial systems. Such an implementation is a major undertaking both financially and from a management and personnel perspective. Should the system not be implemented successfully, or if the system does not perform in a satisfactory manner, it could be disruptive and adversely affect our operations and results of operations, including our ability to report accurate and timely financial results. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES.
