CIK: 310764
Company Name: STRYKER CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2017-02-09
Accession Number: 0000310764-17-000034


ITEM 1 BUSINESS. Making healthcare better is at the heart of what Stryker does. We do this by collaborating with our customers to develop innovative products and services that ultimately improve patients' lives. Our core values guide our behaviors and actions and are fundamental to how Stryker executes its mission. We are a global leader in medical technology with 2016 net sales of $11,325 and net earnings of $1,647. Our products include implants used in joint replacement and trauma surgeries; surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems; endoscopic and communications systems; patient handling, emergency medical equipment and intensive care disposable products; neurosurgical, neurovascular and spinal devices; as well as other products used in a variety of medical specialties. Stryker was incorporated in Michigan in 1946 as the successor company to a business founded in 1941 by Dr. Homer H. Stryker, a prominent orthopaedic surgeon and the inventor of several orthopaedic products. In the United States most of our products are marketed directly to doctors, hospitals and other healthcare facilities. Our products are sold in over 100 countries through company owned sales subsidiaries and branches as well as third party dealers and distributors. As used herein, and except where the context otherwise requires, "Stryker," "we," "us," and "our" refer to Stryker Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. Business Segments and Geographic Information We segregate our operations into 3 reportable business segments Orthopaedics, MedSurg and Neurotechnology and Spine. Financial information regarding our reportable business segments and certain geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Notes 10 and 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Net Sales by Reportable Segment 2016 2015 2014 Orthopaedics $ 4,422 39 % $ 4,223 43 % $ 4,153 43 % MedSurg 4,894 43 3,895 39 3,781 39 Neurotechnology and Spine 2,009 18 1,828 18 1,741 18 Total $ 11,325 100 % $ 9,946 100 % $ 9,675 100 % Orthopaedics Orthopaedics products consist primarily of implants used in hip and knee joint replacements and trauma and extremity surgeries. We bring patients and physicians advanced implant designs and specialized instrumentation that make orthopaedic surgery and recovery simpler, faster and more effective. We support surgeons with the technology and services they need as they develop new surgical techniques. In 2015 we received clearance by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for our Mako total knee application. This expands our Mako product offerings of partial knee and total hip applications to provide a comprehensive solution in the robotic arm assisted reconstructive surgery line. We anticipate the full commercial launch of our Mako total knee application in 2017. Stryker is 1 of four leading global competitors for joint replacement and trauma products; the other 3 being Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc. (Zimmer), DePuy Synthes (a Johnson & Johnson company) and Smith & Nephew plc (Smith & Nephew). Composition of Orthopaedics Net Sales 2016 2015 2014 Knees $ 1,490 34 % $ 1,403 33 % $ 1,396 34 % Hips 1,283 29 1,263 30 1,291 31 Trauma and Extremities 1,364 31 1,291 31 1,230 30 Other 285 6 266 6 236 5 Total $ 4,422 100 % $ 4,223 100 % $ 4,153 100 % In 2012 we voluntarily recalled our Rejuvenate and ABG II Modular Neck hip stems and terminated global distribution of these hip products. In November 2014 we entered into a settlement agreement to compensate eligible United States patients who had surgery to replace their Rejuvenate and ABG II Modular Neck hip stems prior to November 3, 2014, and in December 2016 the settlement program was extended to patients who had revision surgery prior to December 19, 2016. To date we have recorded charges to earnings totaling $1,968 ($2,200 before $232 of insurance recoveries) representing the actuarially determined low end of the range of probable loss to resolve this entire matter globally. Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. MedSurg MedSurg products include surgical equipment and surgical navigation systems (Instruments), endoscopic and communications systems (Endoscopy), patient handling, emergency medical equipment and intensive care disposable products (Medical), reprocessed and remanufactured medical devices (Sustainability) and other medical device products used in a variety of medical specialties. Stryker is 1 of five leading global competitors in Instruments; the other four being Zimmer, Medtronic plc., Johnson & Johnson and ConMed Linvatec, Inc. (a subsidiary of CONMED Corporation). In Endoscopy we compete with Smith & Nephew, ConMed Linvatec, Arthrex, Inc., Karl Storz GmbH & Co., Olympus Optical Co. Ltd. and STERIS plc. and our primary competitors in Medical are Hill Rom Holdings, Inc., Zoll Medical Corporation and Koninklijke Philips N.V. Composition of Medsurg Net Sales 2016 2015 2014 Instruments $ 1,553 32 % $ 1,466 38 % $ 1,424 38 % Endoscopy 1,470 30 1,390 36 1,382 37 Medical 1,633 33 823 21 766 20 Sustainability 238 5 216 5 209 5 Total $ 4,894 100 % $ 3,895 100 % $ 3,781 100 % In 2016 we completed the acquisition of Sage Products, LLC (Sage) for total consideration of approximately $2,875. Sage develops, manufactures and distributes intensive care disposable products. In 2016 we completed the acquisition of Physio Control International, Inc. (Physio) for total net consideration of approximately $1,299. Physio develops, manufactures and markets monitors defibrillators, AEDs and CPR assist devices, along with data management and support services. Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. 1 STRYKER CORPORATION 2016 Form 10 K In 2016 we completed the acquisition of the Synergetics neuro portfolio (Synergetics). The acquired portfolio of Synergetics includes the Malis generator, Spetzler Malis disposable forceps, and our existing Sonopet tips and RF generator. In 2016 Instruments launched Neptune 3, the next generation of its surgical waste management system, which includes an interactive touch screen and an expanded suction range. Medical launched the Performance LOAD manual cot fastener, which helps ensure caregiver and patient safety. Endoscopy launched a 4K surgical display comp1nt to the 1588 AIM Platform, which enables surgeons to optimize surgical visualization. In 2015 we completed the acquisition of CHG Hospital Beds, Inc. (CHG). CHG designs, manufactures and markets low height hospital beds and related accessories. Neurotechnology and Spine Neurotechnology and Spine products include both neurosurgical and neurovascular devices. Our neurotechnology offering includes products used for minimally invasive endovascular techniques; a comprehensive line of products for traditional brain and open skull based surgical procedures; orthobiologic and biosurgery products, including synthetic b1 grafts and vertebral augmentation products; and minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Our spinal implant offering includes cervical, thoracolumbar and interbody systems used in spinal injury, deformity and degenerative therapies. Stryker is 1 of five leading global competitors in Neurotechnology; the other four being Medtronic, Johnson & Johnson, Terumo Corporation and Penumbra, Inc. Stryker is 1 of five leading competitors globally in Spine; the other four being Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc. (a subsidiary of Medtronic), DePuy Synthes, Nuvasive, Inc. and Globus Medical, Inc. Composition of Neurotechnology and Spine Net Sales 2016 2015 2014 Neurotechnology $ 1,255 62 % $ 1,088 60 % $ 1,001 57 % Spine 754 38 740 40 740 43 Total $ 2,009 100 % $ 1,828 100 % $ 1,741 100 % In 2015 the New England Journal of Medicine released results of a study finding that intra arterial treatment to remove stroke causing blood clots provides better outcomes than using a clot dissolving drug. 1 of the devices used in this study was our Trevo Retriever. Medical professionals in the field believe that the study's results will change the practice of acute stroke treatments. Stryker's Trevo Retriever is a leading device in the market that allows physicians to visualize blood clot interaction during treatment. In 2016 the FDA expanded the indication for the Trevo Retriever as a front line treatment to reduce paralysis, speech difficulties and other stroke disabilities in patients experiencing acute ischemic stroke. Trevo is the first thrombectomy device to receive this expanded indication. Geographic Areas In 2016 approximately 73% of our net sales were generated from customers in the United States. Additional geographic information is included under "Results of Operations" in Item 7 of this report and Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Raw Materials and Inventory Raw materials essential to our business are generally readily available from multiple sources; however, certain of our raw materials are currently sourced from single suppliers. Substantially all products we manufacture are stocked in inventory, while certain MedSurg products are assembled to order. The dollar amount of backlog orders at any given time is not meaningful to an understanding of our business taken as a whole. Patents and Trademarks Patents and trademarks are significant to our business to the extent that a product or an attribute of a product represents a unique design or process. Patent protection of such products restricts competitors from duplicating these unique designs and features. We seek to obtain patent protection on our products whenever appropriate for protecting our competitive advantage. On December 31, 2016 we owned approximately 2,184 United States patents and approximately 3,454 international patents. Seasonality Our business is generally not seasonal in nature; however, the number of orthopaedic implant surgeries is typically lower in the summer months, and sales of capital equipment are generally higher in the fourth quarter. Competition In each of our product lines we compete with local and global companies. Competition exists in all product lines without regard to the number and size of the competing companies involved. The development of new and innovative products is important to our success in all areas of our business. Competition in research involving the development and improvement of new and existing products and processes is particularly significant. The competitive environment requires substantial investments in continuing research and maintaining sales forces. We believe our commitment to innovation, quality and service and our reputation differentiate us in the highly competitive product categories in which we operate and enable us to compete effectively. We believe that our competitive position in the future will depend to a large degree on our ability to develop new products and make improvements to existing products. Product Development Most of our products and product improvements were developed internally at research facilities in the United States, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Puerto Rico, Sweden and Switzerland. We also invest through acquisitions in technologies developed by third parties that have the potential to expand the markets in which we operate. We maintain close working relationships with physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist us in product development efforts. The total costs of research, development and engineering activities were $715, $625 and $614 in 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Regulation Our businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in which we operate, and the general trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. In the United States the Medical Device Amendments of 1976 to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and its subsequent amendments and the regulations issued and proposed thereunder provide for regulation by the FDA of the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, including most of our products. Many of our new products fall into FDA classifications that require notification submitted as a 510(k) and review by the FDA before we begin marketing them. Certain of our products require extensive clinical testing, consisting of safety and efficacy studies, followed by pre market approval (PMA) applications for specific surgical indications. The FDA's Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. 2 STRYKER CORPORATION 2016 Form 10 K facilities by the FDA. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacture and marketing of our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) adopted the European Medical Device Directives, which form a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to meet certain quality system requirements and obtain CE marking for their products. We have authorization to apply the CE marking to substantially all of our products. In addition, we comply with the unique regulatory requirements of each of the countries in Europe and other countries in which we market our products. Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to limit the growth of healthcare expenses generally and hospital costs in particular, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. It is not possible to predict at this time the long term impact of such cost containment measures on our future business. In addition, business practices in the healthcare industry are scrutinized, particularly in the United States, by federal and state government agencies, and the resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties. Employees On December 31, 2016 we had approximately 33,000 employees globally. The number of employees increased from 2015 largely due to our Sage and Physio acquisitions. Certain international employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We believe that we maintain positive relationships with our employees globally. Executive Officers on January 31, 2017 Name Age Title First Became an Executive Officer Kevin A. Lobo 51 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 2011 Yin C. Becker 53 Vice President of Communication and Public Affairs 2016 William E. Berry Jr. 51 Vice President, Corporate Controller and Principal Accounting Officer 2014 Glenn S. Boehnlein 55 Vice President, Chief Financial Officer 2016 Lonny J. Carpenter 55 Group President, Global Quality and Business Operations 2008 M. Kathryn Fink 47 Vice President, Chief Human Resources Officer 2016 David K. Floyd 56 Group President, Orthopaedics 2012 Michael D. Hutchinson 46 General Counsel 2014 Graham A. McLean 52 President, Asia Pacific 2017 Katherine A. Owen 46 Vice President, Strategy and Investor Relations 2007 Bijoy S.N. Sagar 48 Vice President, Chief Information Officer 2014 Timothy J. Scannell 52 Group President, MedSurg and Neurotechnology 2008 Each of our executive officers was elected by our Board of Directors to serve in the office indicated until the first meeting of the Board of Directors following the annual meeting of shareholders in 2017 or until a successor is chosen and qualified or until his or her resignation or removal. Each of our executive officers held the position above or served Stryker in various executive or administrative capacities for at least five years, except for Ms. Fink and Mr. Sagar. Prior to joining Stryker in October 2013, Ms. Fink held a variety of senior level human resources roles for the previous six years at Johnson & Johnson, most recently as the Worldwide Vice President, Human Resources of Ethicon. While at Stryker, Ms. Fink held 2 different senior level Human Resource roles. Prior to joining Stryker in May 2014, Mr. Sagar served as the Chief Information officer for Merck Millipore, and before that as Global Head of Information Systems and a member of the divisional board for the chemicals division of Merck KGaA. Mr. McLean was appointed to the position of President, Asia Pacific, effective January 1, 2017. Prior to this role, Mr. McLean held a variety of senior level leadership roles at Stryker since 2005. William R. Jellison retired from his role as Vice President, Chief Financial Officer effective April 1, 2016. Glenn S. Boehnlein, who served as Group Vice President, Chief Financial Officer for MedSurg & Neurotechnology since 2011, was promoted to Vice President, Chief Financial Officer effective April 1, 2016. Before his role as Group Vice President, Chief Financial Officer for MedSurg & Neurotechnology, Mr. Boehnlein held a variety of senior finance roles in the MedSurg & Neurotechnology group. Available Information Our main corporate website address is www.stryker.com. Copies of our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Annual Reports on Form 10 K and Current Reports on Form 8 K filed or furnished to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request to our Corporate Secretary at our principal executive offices. All of our SEC filings are also available free of charge on our website within the "For Investors SEC Filings & Ownership Reports" link as soon as reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. All SEC filings are also available at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov . ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS. This report contains statements referring to us that are not historical facts and are considered "forward looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are intended to take advantage of the "safe harbor" provisions of the Reform Act, are based on current projections about operations, industry conditions, financial condition and liquidity. Words that identify forward looking statements include words such as "may," "could," "will," "should," "possible," "plan," "predict," "forecast," "potential," "anticipate," "estimate," "expect," "project," "intend," "believe," "may impact," "on track," "goal," "strategy" and words and terms of similar substance used in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance, an acquisition or our businesses. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward looking statements. Those statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results could differ materially and adversely from these forward looking statements. Some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward looking statements include the risks discussed below. Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties discussed below that could materially and adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition and results of operations. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem not to be material may also materially and adversely affect our business, cash flows, financial condition or results of operations. LEGAL AND REGULATORY RISKS Current economic and political conditions make tax rules in any jurisdiction subject to significant change Proposals for broad reform of the existing United States corporate tax system are under evaluation by various legislative and administrative bodies. Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. 3 STRYKER CORPORATION 2016 Form 10 K We cannot predict the overall impact that such proposals may have on our business. In addition, further changes in the tax laws of foreign jurisdictions could arise, including as a result of the base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) project undertaken by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD, which represents a coalition of member countries, has issued recommendations that, in some cases, would make substantial changes to numerous long standing tax positions and principles. These contemplated changes, to the extent adopted by OECD members and or other countries, could increase tax uncertainty and may adversely affect our provision for income taxes. The impact of United States healthcare reform legislation on our business remains uncertain In 2010 the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) was enacted. While the provisions of the ACA are intended to expand access to health insurance coverage and improve the quality of healthcare over time, other provisions of the legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, are having a meaningful effect on the way healthcare is developed and delivered and could have a significant effect on our business. Among other things, the ACA imposed a 23 percent excise tax on medical devices that applies only to United States sales, which are a majority of our medical device sales; however, Congress suspended the excise tax for 2016 and 2017. We are unable to predict whether the suspension will be continued beyond 2017. We also face uncertainties that might result from modification or repeal of any of the provisions of the ACA, including as a result of current and future executive orders and legislative actions. We cannot predict what other healthcare programs and regulations will ultimately be implemented at the federal or state level or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the United States may have on our business. We are subject to extensive governmental regulation relating to the manufacturing, labeling and marketing of our products Our products are subject to extensive and evolving regulations and rigorous regulatory enforcement by the FDA and other governmental authorities in the United States and internationally. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals to market a medical device can be costly and time consuming and approvals might not be granted timely. We have ongoing responsibilities under the laws and regulations applicable to our products and facilities and are subject to periodic inspections by the FDA and other governmental authorities to determine compliance with the quality system and medical device reporting regulations and other requirements. Remediation costs can be significant. If we fail to fully comply with applicable regulatory requirements, we may be subject to a range of sanctions, including substantial fines, warning letters that require corrective action, product seizures, recalls, the suspension of product manufacturing, revocation of approvals, exclusion from future participation in government healthcare programs, substantial fines and criminal prosecution. We are subject to federal, state and foreign healthcare regulations including anti bribery and anti corruption laws, and could face substantial penalties if we fail to fully comply with such regulations and laws The relationships that we and our distributors and others that market our products have with healthcare professionals, such as physicians and hospitals, are subject to scrutiny under various state and federal laws often referred to collectively as healthcare fraud and abuse laws. In addition, the United States and foreign government regulators have increased the enforcement of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and other anti bribery laws. We also must comply with a variety of other laws that protect the privacy of individually identifiable healthcare information and impose extensive tracking and reporting related to all transfers of value provided to certain healthcare professionals. These laws and regulations are broad in scope and are subject to evolving interpretation and we could be required to incur substantial costs to monitor compliance or to alter our practices if we are found not to be in compliance. Violations of these laws may be punishable by criminal or civil sanctions, including substantial fines, imprisonment of current or former employees and exclusion from participation in governmental healthcare programs. We may be adversely affected by product liability claims, unfavorable court decisions or legal settlements We are exposed to potential product liability risks inherent in the design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices, many of which are implanted in the human body for long periods of time or indefinitely. We are currently defendants in a number of product liability matters, including those relating to our Rejuvenate and ABGII Modular Neck hip stems discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. These matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable. In addition, we may incur significant legal expenses regardless of whether we are found to be liable. We are self insured for product liability related claims and expenses. Intellectual property litigation and infringement claims could cause us to incur significant expenses or prevent us from selling certain of our products The medical device industry is characterized by extensive intellectual property litigation and, from time to time, we are the subject of claims of infringement or misappropriation. Regardless of outcome, such claims are expensive to defend and divert management and operating personnel from other business issues. A successful claim or claims of patent or other intellectual property infringement against us could result in payment of significant m1tary damages and or royalty payments or negatively impact our ability to sell current or future products in the affected category. Dependence on patent and other proprietary rights and failing to protect such rights or to be successful in litigation related to such rights may impact offerings in our product portfolios Our long term success largely depends on our ability to market technologically competitive products. If we fail to obtain or maintain adequate intellectual property protection, it could allow others to sell products that directly compete with proprietary features in our product portfolio. Also, our issued patents may be subject to claims challenging their validity and scope and raising other issues. In addition, currently pending or future patent applications may not result in issued patents. MARKET RISKS Macroeconomic developments could negatively affect our ability to conduct business in affected regions Financial difficulties experienced by our customers, distributors and suppliers could result in product delays and inventory issues; risks to accounts receivable could also include delays in collection and greater bad debt expense. We have exposure to exchange rate fluctuations on cross border transactions and translation of local currency results into United States Dollars We report our financial results in United States Dollars and 27% of our net sales are denominated in foreign currencies, including the Euro, the British Pound and the Japanese Yen. Cross border transactions with external parties and intercompany relationships result in increased exposure to foreign currency exchange effects. While we use derivative instruments to manage the impact of currency exchange; our hedging strategies may not be successful, and our unhedged exposures continue to be subject to currency fluctuations. In addition, the weakening or Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. 4 STRYKER CORPORATION 2016 Form 10 K strengthening of the United States Dollar results in favorable or unfavorable translation effects when the results of our foreign locations are translated into United States Dollars. Additional capital that we may require in the future may not be available to us or may only be available to us on unfavorable terms Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including operating requirements, current and future acquisitions and the need to refinance existing debt. Our ability to issue additional debt or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected by our debt levels, unfavorable changes in economic conditions generally or uncertainties that affect the capital markets. Changes in credit ratings issued by nationally recognized credit rating agencies could also adversely affect our access to and cost of financing. Higher borrowing costs or the inability to access capital markets could adversely affect our ability to support future growth and operating requirements. BUSINESS AND OPERATIONAL RISKS We are subject to cost containment measures in the United States and other countries resulting in pricing pressures Initiatives sponsored by government agencies, legislative bodies and the private sector to control healthcare costs, including price regulation and competitive pricing, are ongoing in markets where we do business. Pricing pressure has also increased due to continued consolidation among healthcare providers, trends toward managed care, the shift toward governments becoming the primary payers of healthcare expenses, reduction in reimbursement levels and medical procedure volumes and government laws and regulations relating to sales and promotion, reimbursement and pricing generally. We operate in a highly competitive industry in which competition in the development and improvement of new and existing products is significant The markets in which we compete are highly competitive. New products and surgical procedures are introduced on an ongoing basis and our present or future products could be rendered obsolete or uneconomical by technological advances by our competitors, who may respond more quickly to new or emerging technologies, undertake more extensive marketing campaigns, have greater financial, marketing and other resources or be more successful in attracting potential customers, employees and strategic partners. We may be unable to maintain adequate working relationships with healthcare professionals We seek to maintain close working relationships with respected physicians and medical personnel in hospitals and universities who assist in product research and development. We rely on these professionals to assist us in the development and improvement of proprietary products. If we are unable to maintain these relationships, our ability to develop, market and sell new and improved products could be adversely affected. We are subject to additional risks associated with our extensive international operations We develop, manufacture and distribute our products globally. Our international operations are subject to additional risks and potential costs, including changes in reimbursement, changes in regulatory requirements, differing local product preferences and product requirements, diminished protection of intellectual property in some countries, trade protection measures and import or export licensing requirements, difficulty in staffing and managing foreign operations, and political and economic instability. Our business could be adversely impacted if we are unable to successfully manage these and other risks of international operations in an increasingly volatile environment. We may be unable to capitalize on previous or future acquisitions In addition to internally developed products, we invest in new products and technologies through acquisitions. Such investments are inherently risky, and we cannot guarantee that any acquisition will be successful or will not have a material unfavorable impact on us. The risks include the activities required and resources allocated to integrate new businesses, diversion of management time that could adversely affect management's ability to focus on other projects, the inability to realize the expected benefits, savings or synergies from the acquisition, the loss of key personnel and exposure to unexpected liabilities of acquired companies. In addition, we cannot be certain that the businesses we acquire will become or remain profitable. We may incur goodwill impairment charges related to 1 or more of our business units We perform our annual impairment test for goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if indicators are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist. In evaluating the potential for impairment we make assumptions regarding revenue projections, growth rates, cash flows, tax rates and discount rates. These assumptions are uncertain and by nature may vary from actual results. A significant reduction in the estimated fair values could result in impairment charges. We could be negatively impacted by future changes in the allocation of income to each of the income tax jurisdictions in which we operate We operate in multiple income tax jurisdictions both in the United States and internationally. Accordingly, our management must determine the appropriate allocation of income to each jurisdiction based on current interpretations of complex income tax regulations. Income tax authorities regularly perform audits of our income tax filings. Income tax audits associated with the allocation of income and other complex issues, including inventory transfer pricing and cost sharing, product royalty and foreign branch arrangements, may require an extended period of time to resolve and may result in significant income tax adjustments. We could experience a failure of a key information technology system, process or site or a breach of information security, including a cybersecurity breach or failure of 1 or more key information technology systems, ne2rks, processes, associated sites or service providers We rely extensively on information technology (IT) systems to conduct business. In addition, we rely on ne2rks and services, including internet sites, data hosting and processing facilities and tools and other hardware, software and technical applications and platforms, some of which are managed, hosted, provided and or used by third parties or their vendors, to assist in conducting our business. Numerous and evolving cybersecurity threats pose potential risks to the security of our IT systems, ne2rks and services, as well as the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data. While we have made investments seeking to address these threats, including monitoring of ne2rks and systems, hiring of experts, employee training and security policies for employees and third party providers, the techniques used in these attacks change frequently and may be difficult to detect for periods of time and we may face difficulties in anticipating and implementing adequate preventative measures. If our IT systems are damaged or cease to function properly, the ne2rks or service providers we rely upon fail to function properly, or we or 1 of our third party providers suffer a loss or disclosure of our business or stakeholder information due to any number of causes ranging from catastrophic events or power outages to improper data handling or security breaches and our business continuity plans do not effectively address these failures on a timely basis, we may be exposed to reputational, competitive and business harm as well as litigation and regulatory action. Dollar amounts in millions except per share amounts or as otherwise specified. 5 STRYKER CORPORATION 2016 Form 10 K An inability to successfully manage the implementation of our new global enterprise resource planning ("ERP") system could adversely affect our operations and operating results We are in the process of implementing a new global ERP system. This system will replace many of our existing operating and financial systems. Such an implementation is a major undertaking, both financially and from a management and personnel perspective. Any disruptions, delays or deficiencies in the design and implementation of our new ERP system could adversely affect our ability to process orders, ship products, provide services and customer support, send invoices and track payments, fulfill contractual obligations or otherwise operate our business. We may be unable to attract and retain key employees Our sales, technical and other key personnel play an integral role in the development, marketing and selling of new and existing products. If we are unable to recruit, hire, develop and retain a talented, competitive work force, we may not be able to meet our strategic business objectives. Interruption of manufacturing operations could adversely affect our business We and our suppliers have manufacturing sites all over the world; however, the manufacturing of certain of our product lines is concentrated in 1 or more plants. Damage to these facilities or issues in our manufacturing arising from a failure to follow specific internal protocols and procedures, compliance concerns relating to the quality systems regulation, equipment breakdown or malfunction or other factors could adversely affect the availability of our products. In the event of an interruption in manufacturing, we may be unable to move quickly to alternate means of producing affected products to meet customer demand. In the event of a significant interruption, we may experience lengthy delays in resuming production of affected products due to the need for regulatory approvals. We may experience loss of market share, additional expense and harm to our reputation. We use a variety of raw materials, comp1nts or devices in our global supply chains, production and distribution processes; significant shortages or price increases could increase our operating costs, require significant capital expenditures, or adversely impact the competitive position of our products Our reliance on certain suppliers to secure raw materials, comp1nts and finished devices exposes us to product shortages and unanticipated increases in prices. In addition, several raw materials, comp1nts, and finished devices are procured from a sole source due to the quality considerations, unique intellectual property considerations or constraints associated with regulatory requirements. If sole source suppliers are acquired or were unable or unwilling to deliver these materials, we may not be able to manufacture or have available 1 or more products during such period of unavailability and our business could suffer. In certain cases we may not be able to establish additional or replacement suppliers for such materials in a timely or cost effective manner, largely as a result of FDA and other regulations that require, among other things, validation of materials and comp1nts prior to their use in our products. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES.
