CIK: 313143
Company Name: HAEMONETICS CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-05-26
Accession Number: 0000950123-11-054481


Item 1 Business (A) General History of the Business Haem1tics was founded in 1971 as a medical device company a pi1er and market leader in developing and manufacturing automated blood comp1nt collection devices and surgical blood salvage devices. In 1983, we were acquired by American Hospital Supply Corporation ( AHS ), which was then acquired by Baxter Travenol Laboratories, Inc. ( Baxter ). In December 1985, a group of investors, which included Haem1tics employees, purchased the Company from Baxter. In May 1991, we completed an initial public offering and to this day remain an independent company with products and services marketed in more than 80 countries around the world. Haem1tics devices help ensure a safe and adequate blood supply and assist blood centers and hospitals in their efforts to operate efficiently and in compliance with regulatory requirements. Our customers are blood and plasma collectors, hospitals and health care providers globally. Several years ago, we recognized that devices were not enough. Our customers told us of the varied challenges they were facing. Collection centers needed to attract more donors. Hospitals needed to manage blood more efficiently and effectively. At Haem1tics, we understood immediately that we needed to transform our business to serve these needs. We altered our mission from providing blood collection and salvage devices to delivering blood management solutions. We looked at every step in the process, from what factors attract people to donate to how blood is tracked until it is transfused into a patient. We recognized that our customers needed solutions that helped them run their business more efficiently and that improved donor satisfaction on 1 end, and patient outcomes on the other. We embarked on a strategy to expand our markets and product portfolio to offer more comprehensive blood management solutions to our customers. Through internal product development and external acquisitions, we have significantly expanded our product offerings. We now offer devices and related consumables, information technology software platforms, and consulting services. By better understanding our customers needs, we are creating comprehensive blood management solutions for blood collectors and healthcare systems around the world. (B) Financial Information about Industry Segments We report revenues for multiple product lines under four global product categories plasma, blood center, hospital, and software solutions. Plasma markets plasma collection devices and consumables. Blood center markets blood collection and processing devices and consumables. Hospital markets surgical blood salvage and blood demand diagnostic devices and consumables, and blood distribution systems. The software solutions product category consists of information technology platforms and consulting services. Although we address our customer constituents through multiple product lines, we manage our business as 1 operating segment the design, manufacture, implementation, support and marketing of blood management solutions. Our chief operating decision maker uses consolidated financial results to make operating and strategic decisions. Design and manufacturing processes, as well as economic characteristics and the regulatory environment in which we operate, are largely the same for all product lines. The financial information required for the business segment is included herein in Note 15 of the financial statements, entitled Segment, Geographic and Customer Information . (C) Narrative Description of the Business (i) Products and Solutions Haem1tics is committed to helping our customers create and maintain a safe and efficient blood supply chain. Blood and its comp1nts have several vital frequently life saving clinical applications. Plasma is manufactured into pharmaceuticals to treat a variety of illnesses and hereditary disorders such as hemophilia; 1 Table of Contents red cells treat trauma patients or patients undergoing surgery with high blood loss, such as open heart surgery or organ transplant; and platelets treat cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Specifically, we develop and market a wide range of systems used with plasma and blood donors to automate the collection and processing of blood into its comp1nts plasma, platelets, and red cells. We also develop and market a variety of systems to hospitals that automate the cleaning and reinfusion of a surgical patient blood during surgery, automate the tracking and distribution of blood in the hospital, and enhance blood diagnostics. We also market information technology platforms to promote efficient and compliant operations for all of our customer groups. Finally, we market consulting services to reduce costs and improve operating efficiencies in blood management. PLASMA CATEGORY OF PRODUCTS AND SOLUTIONS The Plasma Collection Market for Fractionation Human plasma is collected and processed by pharmaceutical companies into therapeutic and diagnostic products that aid in the treatment of immune diseases and coagulation disorders. Plasma is also used to aid patients with extreme blood loss such as trauma victims. Automated plasma collection technology allows for the safe and efficient collection of plasma. There are approximately 22 million liters of plasma obtained from automated collections worldwide annually. We market plasma collection devices, but do not make plasma derived pharmaceuticals. Many bio pharmaceutical companies are vertically integrated in all comp1nts of their business and thus are now collecting and fractionating the plasma required to manufacture their pharmaceuticals. This vertical integration paved the way for highly efficient plasma supply chain management and the plasma industry leverages information technology to manage operations from the point of plasma donation to fractionation to the production of the final product. Automated Plasma Collection Systems PCS (reported as plasma product line) Until Haem1tics introduced automated plasma collection technology in the 1980s, plasma for fractionation was collected manually. Manual collection was time consuming, labor intensive, produced relatively poor yields, and posed risk to donors. Today, the vast majority of plasma collections worldwide are performed using automated collection technology because it is safer and cost effective. With PCS brand automated collection technology, more plasma can be collected during any 1 donation event because the other blood comp1nts are returned to the donor through sterile disposable sets used for the blood donation procedure. Haem1tics offers 1 stop shopping to our plasma collection customers, enabling them to source from us the full range of products necessary for their plasma collection operations. We offer consulting services that help our customers develop business solutions to support process excellence, donor recruitment, and business design. To implement those solutions, we offer a full range of products, including PCS brand plasma collection equipment and consumables, plasma collection containers, intravenous solutions, and tubing sealers necessary for plasma collection and storage. We market a protocol for our PCS system that shortens the donation process which allows our customers to improve the efficiency of their collections. We also offer a robust portfolio of integrated information technology platforms for plasma customers to manage their donors, operations, and supply chain. eQue Automated Interview and Assessment automates the donor interview and qualification process. eLynx Workflow Optimization streamlines the workflow process in the plasma center. Donor Management System (DMS) provides plasma collection centers with the controls necessary to continually assess and evaluate donor suitability, determine the release ability of units collected, and manage unit distribution. With our information technology platforms, plasma collectors are better able to manage processes across the plasma supply chain, react quickly to business changes, and identify opportunities to reduce costs. 2 Table of Contents BLOOD CENTER CATEGORY OF PRODUCTS AND SOLUTIONS The Blood Collection Market for Transfusion There are millions of blood donations throughout the world every year that produce blood products for transfusion to surgical, trauma, or chronically ill patients. In the U.S. al1, approximately 15 million units of blood are collected each year. Patients typically receive only blood comp1nts necessary to treat a particular clinical condition for example, red cells to surgical patients, platelets to cancer patients, and plasma to trauma victims. Platelet therapy is frequently used to alleviate the effects of b1 marrow suppression, a condition in which b1 marrow is unable to produce a sufficient quantity of platelets. B1 marrow suppression is most commonly a side effect of chemotherapy. Platelet therapy is also used for patients with bleeding disorders. Physicians who prescribe platelet therapy will commonly turn to single donor platelet products (i.e., enough platelets collected from 1 donor, during an automated collection, to constitute a transfusible dose) to minimize a patient exposure to multiple donors and possible blood borne diseases. Red cells are frequently transfused to patients to replace blood lost during surgery. Red cells are also transfused to patients with blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia or aplastic anemia. Plasma, in addition to its role in creating life saving pharmaceuticals, is frequently transfused to trauma victims and to replace blood volume lost during surgery. Worldwide demand for blood is expected to continue to rise modestly as the population ages and more patients have need for and access to medical therapies that require blood transfusions. Furthermore, highly populated emerging markets countries are advancing their healthcare coverage and as greater numbers of people gain access to more advanced medical treatment, additional demand for blood comp1nts, plasma derived drugs and surgical procedures increases directly. This increasing demand for blood is partially offset by the development of less invasive, lower blood loss procedures. Recently, the economy has also had an effect on the demand for blood, as fewer surgeries are performed. We expect the worldwide market for blood comp1nts to return to growing modestly in the low single digits. Most donations worldwide are non automated procedures (also referred to as manual or whole blood donations). In this process, whole blood is collected from the donor and then transported to a central laboratory where it is separated into its constituent parts red cells, platelets and plasma. Haem1tics has a multi year strategy to enter the whole blood market with new and differentiated solutions, including an automated whole blood collector. We don t meaningfully participate in this market today, as we don t offer collection kits. We do offer blood centers integrated information technology solutions that allow blood centers to effectively manage their operations. Haem1tics is a leader in automated blood collections. While this share of the market is smaller, we believe that today it is a more effective way of collecting and distributing blood products. In this procedure, whole blood does not need to be transferred to a central laboratory for separation. Instead, the blood separation process is automated and occurs in real time while a person is donating blood. In this separation method, only the specific blood comp1nt targeted is collected, and the remaining comp1nts are returned to the blood donor. Automated blood comp1nt collection allows significantly more of the targeted blood comp1nt to be collected during a donation event. We believe automation improves blood collection safety and efficiency, as well as regulatory compliance. In the U.S., automated collection systems annually collect more than 16 million red cell units and approximately 18 million platelet units (called single donor platelets). In many countries, blood collection is controlled by a single, usually governmental, organization. However, the United States does not have a single centralized blood collection system. While the American Red Cross collects about 40% of the nation blood, the remainder of the U.S. blood supply is procured from more than 100 other blood collection agencies. In addition, blood demand comes from over 4,000 hospitals throughout the United States. This decentralization of blood collection and the significant number of hospitals using blood makes it difficult to predict blood demand, adequately supply the right blood comp1nts, and effectively manage the blood supply chain. 3 Table of Contents Integrated information technology and blood management systems like the kind offered by Haem1tics are beginning to have an impact on the management of blood collection centers as blood collectors respond to demands for efficient blood supply chain management, seek to lower costs, and respond to ever increasing regulatory restrictions. Haem1tics Automated Blood Collection Systems (reported as blood center product line) We market the MCS brand apheresis system which collects specific blood comp1nts and returns to the donor the unwanted comp1nts. The MCS system, as an automated platelet collection system, collects 1 or more therapeutic doses of platelets during a single donation by a volunteer blood donor. As noted above, platelets derived from a non automated donation of whole blood (also called a manual collection) must be pooled together with platelets from 4 7 other donor platelets to make a single therapeutically useful dose because platelets are a very small portion of whole blood volume. Our MCS brand system can also help blood collectors optimize the collection of red cells by automating the blood separation function, eliminating the need for laboratory processing, enabling the collection of 2 transfusible doses of red cells from a single donor thus minimizing red cell shortages. We call this our 2 unit protocol or double red cell collection. In addition to the 2 unit protocol, blood collectors can use the MCS brand system to collect either 1 unit of red cells and a jumbo (double) unit of plasma or 1 unit of red cells and 1 unit of platelets from a single donor, or they may leukoreduce the 2 unit red cell collections. Leukoreduction is the removal of potentially harmful white blood cells from the collected red cells to prevent or mitigate adverse reactions by the patient who receives the product. Leukoreduction has been adopted in many countries worldwide and an estimated 80% of all red cells in the U.S. are now leukoreduced. Another Haem1tics system that is helping manage the supply of red cells is the ACP 215 automated cell processing system, which allows blood collectors and hospitals to freeze and thaw red cells in order to maintain a frozen blood reserve. Red cells can be stored in a refrigerator for up to 42 days and can be stored frozen for up to 10 years. Blood reserves are often maintained to enable a hospital to respond adequately to large scale emergencies where many people contemporaneously require blood transfusions or to treat patients who require transfusions of very rare blood types. Our blood processing systems can also remove plasma from red cells for patients who need specially treated blood. Better balancing of demand with supply will also mitigate shortages. Our information technology platforms span blood center operations and automate and track operations from the recruitment of the blood donor to the disposition of the blood product. The eDonor tm platform is a web based product that manages donor recruitment and retention. The Hemasphere platform supports our customers key partners organizations running blood drives to manage the mobile blood drive process. Our Donor Doc software automates the interview and assessment process prior to a person donating. The eLynx software optimizes the workflow processes in the donor center. SafeTrace and the new El Dorado Donor products are donation and blood unit management systems. The Surround tm software supports laboratory testing management. We also offer products developed for the European market Sapanet tm , a software suite designed for workflow management and quality control in blood centers and laboratories; and Edgeblood tm and EdgeTrack, integrated software applications that manage activities of a transfusion center from blood donations to traceability of patient transfusions. Combined, these platforms help blood collectors to improve safety, regulatory compliance, and efficiency and to manage processes across the blood supply chain. Haem1tics offers consulting services that leverage our experience in blood banking, lean manufacturing, and Six Sigma to recommend new approaches to business process excellence. Our internal use of business practice improvement tools spawned requests from our U.S. customer base to seek our training of their selected staff with the intent to develop expertise in problem solving and solution creation skills. Our consulting services address donor recruitment, operations, blood collection, quality control, and more. 4 Table of Contents HOSPITAL CATEGORY OF PRODUCTS AND SOLUTIONS The Transfusion Market for Hospitals Loss of blood is common in open heart, trauma, transplant, vascular, and orthopedic procedures, and the need for transfusion of oxygen carrying red cells to make up for lost blood volume is routine. Prior to the introduction of our technology, patients were exclusively transfused with blood from volunteer donors. Donor blood (also referred to as allogeneic blood ) carries various potential risks including (1) risk of transfusion with the wrong blood type (the most common cause of transfusion related death), (2) risk of transfusion reactions including death, but more commonly chills, fevers or other side effects that can prolong a patient recovery, and (3) risk of transfusion of blood with a blood borne disease or infectious agent. As a result of numerous blood safety initiatives, today blood transfusions are extremely safe, especially in developed and resourced health care systems. However, transfusions are not risk free. Surgical blood salvage (also known as autotransfusion) reduces or eliminates a patient need for blood donated from others and ensures that the patient receives the safest blood possible his or her own. Surgical blood salvage involves the collection of a patient own blood during and after surgery, for reinfusion to that patient. In surgical blood salvage, blood is sucti1d from a wound site, processed and washed through a centrifuge based system which yields concentrated red cells available for transfusion back to the patient. This process occurs in a sterile, closed circuit, single use consumable set which is fitted into an electromechanical device. We market our surgical blood salvage products to hospital based medical specialists, primarily cardiovascular, orthopedic, and trauma surgeons, or to surgical suite service providers. Information technology has become increasingly important in hospital management as administrators strive to provide the best patient care at optimal costs. Despite this trend, there are limited platforms which help hospitals assess and improve blood management practices, track blood within their own hospital systems, or manage the costs of blood. Likewise, there are limited platforms to help hospitals predict demand for their blood suppliers, the blood collection agencies, and link the blood supply chain from donor to patient. As regulations continue to increase and as hospitals struggle with increasing costs, we believe information technology for blood supply chain management will play an important role in hospital administration. Haem1tics Hospital Solutions Over the last few years, hospitals have become more aware of their need to control costs and improve patient safety by managing blood more effectively. Our consulting services, products, and integrated technology platforms help hospitals optimize performance on blood acquisition, storage, and distribution. Our TEG Thromobelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer is a blood diagnostic instrument which measures a patient hemostasis or the ability to form and maintain blood clots. By understanding a patient clotting ability, clinicians can better plan for the patient care, deciding in advance whether to start or discontinue use of certain drugs or, if a transfusion is likely, whether to use donated blood or surgical blood salvage. Such planning supports the best possible clinical outcome, which can lead to lower hospital costs through reduced adverse transfusion reactions, shorter intensive care unit and hospital stays, and exploratory surgeries. The TEG system is comprised of an electromechanical device, single use containers and reagents. Clinicians may decide to use surgical blood salvage as an alternative to transfusion of donor blood. Our surgical blood salvage systems allow for the recovery, segregation and washing of red cells from blood lost by a patient during or after surgery. These red cells are then available to transfuse back to the patient if needed. The Cell Saver brand system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to procedures that involve rapid, high volume blood loss, such as cardiovascular surgeries. It has become the standard of care for high blood loss surgeries. The newer cardioPAT brand system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to open heart surgeries when there is less blood loss at surgery, but where the blood loss continues post surgery. The system is designed to remain with the patient following surgery, to recover blood and produce a washed red cell product for autotransfusion. We have introduced the Quick Connect feature for the cardioPAT system, which permits customers to utilize the processing set selectively, depending on the patient need. 5 Table of Contents The OrthoPAT surgical blood salvage system is targeted to procedures, such as orthopedic, that involve slower, lower volume blood loss that often occurs well after surgery. The system is designed to operate both during and after surgery to recover and wash the patient red cells to prepare them for reinfusion. We have introduced the Quick Connect feature for the OrthoPAT system, which permits customers to utilize the processing set selectively, depending on the patient need. Also included in our hospital product line is the SmartSuction product. This product is an advanced suction system for removal of blood and debris from the surgical field. The system is used in conjunction with surgical blood salvage. Our software products help hospitals track and safely deliver stored blood products. SafeTrace TX, a software product which manages blood product inventory, performs patient cross matching and manages transfusion. In addition, our BloodTrack suite of solutions manages control of blood products from the hospital blood center through to the transfusion to the patient. Smart refrigerators located in operating suites, emergency rooms, and other parts of the hospital dispense blood units with just in time control and automated tracking for efficient documentation. With our more robust offerings, hospitals are better able to manage processes across the blood supply chain and identify increased opportunities to reduce costs and enhance processes. Our IMPACT tm Online web based software platform, which monitors and measures improvements in a hospital blood management practices, provides hospitals with a baseline view of their blood management metrics and helps monitor transfusion rates. If needed by a customer, we also offer business consulting solutions to support process excellence, donor recruitment, business design, and blood management efforts. We also provide blood management assessment tools to hospitals that enable our customers to monitor their progress in order to continually improve their performance. Software Solutions Enhancing the power of our products are the integrated software solutions that track and monitor blood units along all points in the supply chain, , including blood drive and donor management, blood processing, blood distribution, and transfusion management. For our plasma customers, we also provide information technology platforms for managing administrative functions and distribution at plasma fractionation facilities. While each Haem1tics information technology platform can be used as a stand al1, the mission to provide arm to arm blood management solutions is executed by the integration of these platforms. What more, the ability to evaluate data based on the integration of these systems allows customers to continually improve their systems. These systems provide the backb1 of Haem1tics overall commitment to improving blood management systems nationally and globally. Through our services group, we offer business consulting solutions to support process excellence, donor recruitment, business design, and blood management efforts. We also provide blood management assessment tools to hospitals. When combining our software solutions with our devices, we meet our goal to give customers powerful tools for improving blood management while driving growth of our consumables. For example, a hospital may use our consulting services to analyze its blood management practices and recommend changes in practice. Then, the hospital can leverage our devices to predict blood demand, manage blood inventory, and reduce demand for donated blood. Finally, the hospital can use our IMPACT tm Online blood management business intelligence portal to monitor the results of its new practices. The positive patient impact and reduced costs from this integrated blood management approach can be significant. Likewise, by understanding best practices, blood demand, and discreet patient needs, hospitals can more frequently deploy our devices to ensure best patient care. Each of our products, platforms, and services can be marketed individually. However, as our blood management solutions vision is to offer integrated closed loop solutions for blood supply chain management, our software solutions that is, information technology platforms and consulting services can be integrated with the devices and sold through our plasma, blood center, and hospital sales forces. 6 Table of Contents Our integrated product portfolios are as follows Plasma Products Blood Center Products Hospital Products Information Management eQue tm Automated donor interview system and database eLynx Donor workflow optimization software DMS Blood comp1nt collection donor management CaPS Secure plasma donor payment systems Business dashboards Donor Doc tm Automated donor interview system and database eDonor Blood donor scheduling software and services Hemasphere Blood center process management software SafeTrace Blood donor information management system eLynx platform Sapanet tm Laboratory quality management system IMPACT tm Business consulting, advisory services Edgeblood tm Transfusion traceability management system Surround tm Intelligent laboratory management software El Dorado Donor Blood collection center management software SafeTrace TX Transfusion management system and software BloodTrack Manager tm Repository for blood unit movement records BloodTrack Enquiry BloodTrack Advisor IMPACT tm Online Edgecell tm Tissue, organ and cell bank management system Edgelab tm Laboratory management system for hospitals Devices consumables PCS Portable plasma collection and processing system Express tm Plasma collection software enhancement SEBRA shakers SEBRA sealers MCS Mobile collection system Cymbal Automated blood collection system ACP Automated cell processing system SEBRA shakers SEBRA sealers Cell Saver Autologous blood recovery system OrthoPAT Peri and post operative blood salvage system cardioPAT Blood salvage for cardiovascular surgeries SmartSuction Surgical suite blood loss management system TEG Computerized blood testing and analyzing device BloodTrack Blood and transfusion management software Consulting Services Six Sigma Lean manufacturing Business solutions Six Sigma Lean manufacturing Donor recruitment Automation Nation tm Consulting services for blood collectors Collection optimization software validation Six Sigma Lean manufacturing Blood use optimization software validation (ii) Revenue Detail We discuss our revenues using the following categories Disposables (also referred to as consumables, these revenues include the sale of single use collection sets for blood comp1nt collection and processing and surgical blood salvage, plus the fees for the use of our equipment); 7 Table of Contents Software solutions (software sales and consulting services), including Haem1tics software solutions business; and Equipment & other (includes the sale of devices, repairs performed under preventive maintenance contracts or emergency service visits, spare parts sales, and various service and training programs). During fiscal year 2011, net revenues increased 4.8% over fiscal year 2010. Excluding the effect of the extra week in fiscal year 2010, net revenues for fiscal year 2011 increased 6.7%. Sales of disposable products accounted for approximately 815% of net revenues in fiscal year 2011 and 86.0% of net revenues in fiscal year 2010. Sales of our disposable products were 0.6% lower in fiscal year 2011 than in fiscal year 2010, which were 8.4% higher than in fiscal 2009. Without the effects of foreign exchange, which increased 0.1% and 24% during fiscal year 2011 and 2010, respectively, disposable net revenues decreased 0.7% and increased 6.0% during fiscal year 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in fiscal year 2011 is due to reduced collections resulting from slowed growth in plasma, as well as a reduced demand for automated red cell collection and surgical disposable products driven by both competitive pressures and market conditions resulting in fewer surgeries. This decrease was offset by continued strong sales in our emerging markets for platelets and increased revenue resulting from new adoption and continued penetration of our diagnostic product line. These increases to disposable net revenue were primary drivers for the increase during 2010. Software solutions accounted for approximately 9.9% and 5.6% of net revenues in fiscal year 2011 and 2010, respectively. The software solutions increase during fiscal year 2011 was driven primarily by software services revenues associated with the acquisition of Global Med, which occurred on March 31, 2010. Sales of equipment & other accounted for approximately 8.6% of net revenues in fiscal year 2011 and approximately 8.4% of net revenues in fiscal year 2010. The increase in equipment revenue during fiscal year 2011 was driven by acquisition related growth from the SEBRA products, which we acquired in September 2009, and growth in our emerging markets. Irrespective of the increases noted, equipment sales continue to be adversely impacted by restricted hospital capital spending and macro economic trends impacting health care funding across most of our markets. (iii) Marketing Sales Distribution We market and sell our products to commercial plasma collectors, blood systems and independent blood centers, hospitals and hospital service providers, and national health organizations through our own direct sales force (including full time sales representatives and clinical specialists) as well as independent distributors. Sales representatives target the primary decision makers within each of those organizations. In fiscal year 2011, for the eleventh consecutive year, we received the Omega NorthFace ScoreBoard Award for exemplary service to customers. This award is presented to the highest ranked organizations based on customer ratings of performance against customer expectations in areas such as ph1 support, on site operations, technical services, and training. (iv) United States In fiscal year 2011 and 2010, approximately 46.9% and 47.1%, respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated in the U.S., where we primarily use a direct sales force to sell our products. (v) Outside the United States In fiscal year 2011 and 2010, approximately 531% and 529%, respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated through sales to non U.S. customers. Our direct sales force in Europe and Asia includes full time sales representatives and clinical specialists based in the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Sweden, the Netherlands, Italy, Austria, Hong Kong, Canada, Japan, Switzerland, Czech Republic, China, Taiwan, and Belgium. We also use various distributors to market our products in Russia, South America, the Middle East, 8 Table of Contents Africa, and the Far East. Additionally, we have established offices with marketing personnel who work with our distributors in Russia, Lebanon, India and Brazil. (vi) Research, Development and Engineering Our research, development and engineering ( RD&E ) centers in the United States and Switzerland ensure that protocol variations are incorporated to closely match local customer requirements. Resulting from the integration of our Global Med Technologies, Inc. acquisition, our Haem1tics Software Solutions operates at El Dorado Hills, California, USA, Global Med headquarters, and Lim1st, France. In addition, our Haem1tics Software Solutions also maintains development operations in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Customer collaboration is also an important part of our technical strength and competitive advantage. These collaboration customers and transfusion experts provide us with ideas for new products and applications, enhanced protocols, and potential test sites as well as objective evaluations and expert opinions regarding technical and performance issues. The development of blood comp1nt separation products and extracorporeal blood typing and screening systems has required us to maintain technical expertise in various engineering disciplines, including mechanical, electrical, software, and biomedical engineering and material science. Innovations resulting from these various engineering efforts enable us to develop systems that are faster, smaller, and more user friendly, or that incorporate additional features important to our customer base. Our expenditures for RD&E were $327 million for fiscal year 2011 (4.8% of net revenues) and $26.4 million for fiscal year 2010 (4.1% of net revenues). With the exception of the capitalization of software development costs (see Note 17), all RD&E costs are expensed as incurred. We expect to continue to invest resources in RD&E. In fiscal year 2011, RD&E resources were allocated to supporting a next generation surgical blood salvage device, an automated whole blood collection system, and several other projects to enhance our current product portfolio. We also continued to invest in research into nanotechnology applications in the blood typing and screening field. (vii) Manufacturing Our principal manufacturing operations (equipment, disposables, and solutions) are located in Braintree, Massachusetts; Leetsdale, Pennsylvania; Union, South Carolina; Bothwell, Scotland; Niles, Illinois; Signy, Switzerland; and Draper, Utah. In general, our production activities occur in controlled settings or clean room environments. Each step of the manufacturing and assembly process is quality checked, qualified, and validated. Critical process steps and materials are documented to ensure that every unit is produced consistently and meets performance requirements. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposable products. Contracts with our suppliers help mitigate some of the short term effects of price volatility in this market. However, increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Some comp1nt sets manufacturing is performed by outside contractors according to our specifications. We maintain important relationships with 2 Japanese manufacturers that produce finished consumables in Singapore, Japan, and Thailand. Certain parts and comp1nts are purchased from various single sources. If necessary, we believe that, in most cases, alternative sources of supply could be identified and developed within a relatively short period of time. Nevertheless, an interruption in supply could temporarily interfere with production schedules and affect our operations. All of our other equipment and disposable manufacturing sites are certified to the ISO 13485 standard and to the Medical Device Directive allowing placement of the CE mark of conformity. Each blood processing machine is designed in house and assembled from comp1nts that are either manufactured by us or by others to our specifications. The completed instruments are programmed, calibrated, 9 Table of Contents and tested to ensure compliance with our engineering and quality assurance specifications. Inspection checks are conducted throughout the manufacturing process to verify proper assembly and functionality. When mechanical and electronic comp1nts are sourced from outside vendors, those vendors must meet detailed qualification and process control requirements. (viii) Intellectual Property We consider our intellectual property rights to be important to our business. We rely on patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws, as well as provisions in our agreements with third parties to protect our intellectual property rights. We hold patents in the United States and many international jurisdictions on some of our machines, processes, disposables and related technologies. These patents cover certain elements of our systems, including protocols employed in our equipment and certain aspects of our processing chambers and disposables. Our patents may cover current products, products in markets we plan to enter, or products in markets we plan to license, or the patents may be defensive in that they are directed to technologies not currently embodied in our current products. We also license patent rights from third parties that cover technologies that we use or plan to use in our business. To maintain our competitive position, we rely on the technical expertise and know how of our personnel and on our patent rights. We pursue an active and formal program of invention disclosure and patent application in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. We own various trademarks that have been registered in the United States and certain other countries. Our policy is to obtain patent and trademark rights in the U.S. and foreign countries where such rights are available and we believe it is commercially advantageous to do so. However, the standards for international protection of intellectual property vary widely. We cannot assure that pending patent and trademark applications will result in issued patents and registered trademarks, that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged or circumvented by competitors, or that our patents will not be found to be invalid. (ix) Competition We created most of our technologies and have established a record of innovation and market leadership in each of the areas in which we compete. Although we compete directly with others, no other company offers the complete range of integrated solutions designed to meet customers needs across the entire blood supply chain. To remain competitive, we must continue to develop and acquire cost effective new products, information technology platforms, and business services. We believe that our ability to maintain a competitive advantage will continue to depend on a combination of factors. Some factors are largely within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety and cost effectiveness and continual and rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control, including regulatory standards, medical standards and the practice of medicine. In the automated plasma collection market, we principally compete with Fenwal, Inc. on the basis of quality, ease of use, services and technical features of systems, and on the long term cost effectiveness of equipment and disposables. Fenwal, Inc. is an independent company founded in March 2007 when Texas Pacific Group and Maverick Capital acquired the Transfusion Therapies division of Baxter Healthcare Group. In China, the market is populated by local producers of a product that is intended to be similar to ours. Recently, those competitors have expanded to markets beyond China, including Russia, Cuba, and Iran. In March, 2011, Terumo Medical Corporation, a local competitor company in the Japanese automated plasma and platelet collection markets, announced it would acquire Caridian BCT (formerly Gambro BCT). Caridian BCT is 1 of our major competitors in automated platelet collection. Another major competitor in this area is Fenwal. In the automated platelet collection business, competition is based on continual performance improvement, as measured by the time and efficiency of platelet collection and the quality of the platelets collected. Each of these companies has taken a different technological approach in designing their systems for automated platelet collection. In the platelet collection market, we also compete with whole blood collections from which pooled platelets are derived. 10 Table of Contents In the automated red cell collection market, we also compete against Caridian BCT and Fenwal. However, it is important to note that only about 5% of the 40 million units of red cells collected worldwide and about 10% of the 15 million units of red cells collected in the U.S. annually are collected via automation today by these 3 companies combined. So, we more often compete with traditional manual methods of deriving red cells by collecting and separating whole blood. We compete on the basis of total cost, process control, product quality, and inventory management. In the cell processing market, competition is based on level of automation, labor intensiveness, and system type (open versus closed). Open systems may be weaker in good manufacturing process compliance. Moreover, blood processed through open systems has a 24 hour shelf life. We have an open system cell processor as well as a closed system cell processor which gives blood processed through it a 14 day shelf life. We compete with Caridian BCT open systems. Within our hospital business, in the diagnostics market, the TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer is used primarily in the surgical arena. 1 direct competitor, Rotem, is a competitor for us in Europe and in the United States. In fiscal year 2011, Rotem received 510(k) clearance for its device and selected reagents in the U.S. Other competitive technologies include standard coagulation tests that measure various aspects of hemostasis. In the high blood loss surgical blood salvage market, competition is based on reliability, ease of use, service, support, and price. Each manufacturer technology is similar, and our Cell Saver competes principally with Medtronic, Fresenius, and Sorin Biomedica. Our cardioPAT system is the only washed surgical blood salvage device designed to recover red cells for transfusion where blood loss continues post operatively in heart surgery. In the orthopedic surgical blood salvage market, we compete against non automated processing systems whose end product is an unwashed red blood cell unit for transfusion to the patient. The OrthoPAT system is the only system that washes the blood and operates perioperatively. It is designed specifically for use in orthopedic surgeries where a patient often bleeds more slowly, bleeds less, and continues to bleed long after surgery. In the software market, we compete with MAK Systems, Mediware, and home grown applications. These companies provide software to blood and plasma collectors and to hospitals for managing donors, collections, and blood units. N1 of these companies competes in other Haem1tics markets. Our technical staff is highly skilled, but many competitors have substantially greater financial resources and larger technical staffs at their disposal. There can be no assurance that competitors will not direct substantial efforts and resources toward the development and marketing of products competitive with those of Haem1tics. (x) Seasonality Net revenues have historically been higher in the second half of our fiscal year, reflecting principally the seasonal buying patterns of our customers. This has proven true in our last five fiscal years. (xi) Significant Customers The Japan Red Cross Society (JRC) represented 14.2% and 14.3% of our net revenues in fiscal year 2011 and 2010, respectively. (xii) Government Regulation The products we manufacture and market are subject to regulation by the Center of Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ) and the Center of Devices and Radiological Health ( CDRH ) of the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ), and other non United States regulatory bodies. All medical devices introduced to the United States market since 1976 are required by the FDA, as a condition of marketing, to secure either a 510(k) pre market notification clearance or an approved Pre market 11 Table of Contents Approval Application ( PMA ). In the United States, software used to automate blood center operations and blood collections and to track those comp1nts through the system are considered by FDA to be medical devices, subject to 510(k) pre market notification. Intravenous solutions (blood anticoagulants and solutions for storage of red blood cells) marketed by us for use with our automated systems requires us to obtain from CBER an approved New Drug Application ( NDA ) or Abbreviated New Drug Application ( ANDA ). A 510(k) pre market clearance indicates FDA agreement with an applicant determination that the product for which clearance is sought is substantially equivalent to another legally marketed medical device. The process of obtaining a 510(k) clearance involves the submission of clinical data and supporting information. The process of obtaining NDA approval for solutions is likely to take much longer than 510(k) approvals because the FDA review process is more complicated. The FDA Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our facilities. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacturing and marketing of our products. We maintain customer complaint files, record all lot numbers of disposable products, and conduct periodic audits to assure compliance with FDA regulations. We place special emphasis on customer training and advise all customers that device operation should be undertaken only by qualified personnel. The FDA can ban certain medical devices; detain or seize adulterated or misbranded medical devices; order repair, replacement or refund of these devices; and require notification of health professionals and others with regard to medical devices that present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also enjoin and restrain certain violations of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act pertaining to medical devices, or initiate action for criminal prosecution of such violations. We are also subject to regulation in the countries outside the United States in which we market our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directives, which create a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to obtain CE Marking for their products. Outside of the EU, many of the regulations applicable to our products are similar to those of the FDA. However, the national health or social security organizations of certain countries require our products to be registered by those countries before they can be marketed in those countries. We have complied with these regulations and have obtained such registrations. Federal, state and foreign regulations regarding the manufacture and sale of products such as ours are subject to change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, such changes might have on our business. We are also subject to various environmental, health and general safety laws, directives and regulations both in the U.S. and abroad. Our operations, like those of other medical device companies, involve the use of substances regulated under environmental laws, primarily in manufacturing and sterilization processes. We believe that sound environmental, health and safety performance contributes to our competitive strength while benefiting our customers, shareholders and employees. (xiii) Environmental Matters Failure to comply with international, federal and local environmental protection laws or regulations could have an adverse impact upon our business or could require material capital expenditures. We continue to monitor changes in U.S. and international environmental regulations that may present a significant risk to the business, including laws or regulations relating to the manufacture or sale of products using plastics. Action plans are developed to mitigate identified risks. (xiv) Employees As of April 2, 2011, we employed the full time equivalent of 2,201 persons assigned to the following functional areas manufacturing, 861; sales and marketing, 452; general and administrative, 372; research, 12 Table of Contents development, and engineering, 246; and quality control and field service, 270. We consider our employee relations to be satisfactory. (xv) Availability of Reports and Other Information All of our corporate governance materials, including the Principles of Corporate Governance, the Business Conduct Policy and the charters of the Audit, Compensation, and Nominating and Governance Committees are published on the Investor Relations section of our website at http www.haem1tics.com site content investor corp_gov.asp . On this web site the public can also access, free of charge, our annual, quarterly and current reports and other documents filed or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. (D) Financial Information about Foreign and Domestic Operations and Export Sales The financial information required by this Item 1s included herein in Note 15 of the financial statements, entitled Segment, Geographic and Customer Information . Sales to the Japanese Red Cross accounted for 14.2% of net revenues in fiscal year 2011 No other customer accounted for more than 10% of our net revenues. For more information concerning significant customers, see the subheading of Note 2 of the financial statements entitled, Concentration of Credit Risk and Significant Customers . Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Information Statements contained in this report, as well as oral statements we make which are prefaced with the words may, will, expect, anticipate, continue, estimate, project, intend, designed, and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect our future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. These statements are based on our current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which we can give no firm assurance. Further, any forward looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. As it is not possible to predict every new factor that may emerge, forward looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of our actual future financial condition or results. These forward looking statements, like any forward looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated. Such risks and uncertainties include technological advances in the medical field and our standards for transfusion medicine and our ability to successfully implement products that incorporate such advances and standards, product demand and market acceptance of our products, regulatory uncertainties, the effect of economic and political conditions, the impact of competitive products and pricing, the impact of industry consolidation, foreign currency exchange rates, changes in customers ordering patterns, the effect of industry consolidation as seen in the plasma market, the effect of communicable diseases, the effect of uncertainties in markets outside the U.S. (including Europe and Asia) in which we operate and such other risks described under Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report. The foregoing list should not be construed as exhaustive. Item 1A. Risk Factors Set forth below are the risks that we believe are material to our investors. This section contains forward looking statements. You should refer to the explanation of the qualifications and limitations on forward looking statements beginning on page 14 and 47. If we are unable to successfully expand our product lines through internal research & development and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Continued growth of our business depends on our maintaining a pipeline of profitable new products and successful improvements to our existing products. This requires accurate market analysis and carefully targeted application of intellectual and financial resources toward technological innovation or acquisition of new products. The creation and adoption of technological advances is only 1 step. We must also efficiently develop the technology into a product which 13 Table of Contents confers a competitive advantage, represents a cost effective solution or provides improved clinical outcomes. The risks of missteps and set backs are an inherent part of the innovation and development processes in the medical device industry. If we are unable to successfully grow our business through marketing partnerships and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Promising partnerships and acquisitions may not be completed for reasons such as competition among prospective partners or buyers, our inability to reach satisfactory terms, or the need for regulatory approvals. Any acquisition that we complete may be dilutive to earnings and require that we invest significant resources. We may not be able to successfully integrate an acquired business into our existing business, make such businesses profitable, or realize anticipated market growth or cost savings. The economic environment may constrain our ability to access the capital needed for acquisitions and other capital investments. As a medical device manufacturer we are subject to a number of laws and regulations. Non compliance with those laws or regulations could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The manufacture, distribution and marketing of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other non United States regulatory bodies. We must obtain specific regulatory clearance prior to selling any new product or service, a process which is costly and time consuming. Our operations are also subject to continuous review and monitoring by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Failure to substantially comply with applicable regulations could subject our products to recall or seizure by government authorities, or an order to suspend manufacturing activities. As well, if our products were determined to have design or manufacturing flaws, this could result in their recall or seizure. Either of these situations could also result in the imposition of fines. As a majority of our revenue comes from outside the United States, we are subject to export and import restrictions, local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. Export of U.S. technology or goods manufactured in the United States to some jurisdictions requires special U.S. export authorization or local market controls that may be influenced by factors, including political dynamics, outside our control. Regulations relating to the use of certain materials in the manufacture of our products could also require us to convert our production to alternate material(s), which may be more costly or less effective. Many of our competitors have significantly greater financial and other resources. Their greater financial resources may allow them to more rapidly develop new technologies and more quickly address changes in customer requirements. Although no 1 company competes with us across our full line of products, we face competition in each of our product lines. Our ability to remain competitive depends on a combination of factors. Certain factors are within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety, cost effectiveness and continued rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control such as regulatory standards, medical standards, reimbursement policies and practices, and the practice of medicine. Loss of a significant customer could adversely affect our business. The Japan Red Cross Society (JRC) is a significant customer that represented 14.2% of our revenues in fiscal year 2011 Because of the size of this relationship we could experience a significant reduction in revenue if the JRC decided to significantly reduce its purchases from us for any reason including a desire to rebalance its purchases between vendors, or if we are unable to obtain and maintain necessary regulatory approvals in Japan. We also have a concentration of credit risk due to our outstanding accounts receivable balances with the JRC. Additionally, certain other markets and industries can expose us to concentration risk. For example, in our commercial plasma business, customers are relatively large in size. Because of the size of the relationship, we could experience a significant reduction in revenue if 1 or more customers did not renew their contracts. As a global corporation, we are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could adversely affect our cash flows and results of operations. International revenues and expenses account for a substantial portion of our operations and we intend to continue expanding our presence in international 14 Table of Contents markets. In fiscal year 2011, our international revenues accounted for 531% of our total revenues. The exposure to fluctuations in currency exchange rates takes different forms. Reported revenues for sales, as well as manufacturing and operational costs, denominated in foreign currencies by our international businesses, when translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes, fluctuate due to exchange rate movement. Fluctuations in exchange rates could adversely affect our profitability in U.S. dollars of products and services sold by us into international markets, where payment for our products and services and related manufacturing and operational costs is made in local currencies. We are subject to the risks associated with communicable diseases. A significant outbreak of a disease could reduce the demand for our products and affect our ability to provide our customers with products and services. An eligible donor willingness to donate is affected by concerns about their personal health and safety. Concerns about communicable diseases (such as pandemic flu, SARS, or HIV) could reduce the number of donors, and accordingly reduce the demand for our products for a period of time. A significant outbreak of a disease could also affect our employees ability to work, which could limit our ability to produce product and service our customers. There is a risk that the Company intellectual property may be subject to misappropriation in some countries. Certain countries, particularly China, do not enforce compliance with laws that protect intellectual property ( IP ) rights with the same degree of vigor as is available under the U.S. and European systems of justice. Further, certain of the Company IP rights are not registered in China, or if they were, have since expired. This may permit others to produce copies of products in China that are not covered by currently valid patent registrations. There is also a risk that such products may be exported from China to other countries. We sell our products in certain emerging economies. Emerging economies, such as Brazil, Russia, India and China, have less mature product regulatory systems, and can have more volatile financial markets. In addition, government controlled health care systems willingness or ability to invest in our products and systems may abruptly change due to changing government priorities or funding capacity. Our ability to sell products in these economies is dependent upon our ability to hire qualified employees or agents to represent our products locally, and our ability to obtain the necessary regulatory approvals in a less mature regulatory environment. If we are unable to retain qualified representatives or maintain the necessary regulatory approvals, we will not be able to continue to sell products in these markets. We are exposed to a higher degree of financial risk, if we extend credit to customers in these economies. In many of the international markets in which we do business, including certain parts of Europe, South America, the Middle East, Russia and Asia, our employees, agents or distributors offer to sell our products in response to public tenders issued by various governmental agencies. There is additional risk in selling our products through agents or distributors, particularly in public tenders. If they misrepresent our products, do not provide appropriate service and delivery, or commit a violation of local or U.S. law, our reputation could be harmed, and we could be subject to fines, sanctions or both. We have a complex international supply chain. Any disruption to 1 or more of our suppliers production or delivery of sufficient volumes of subcomp1nts conforming to our specifications could disrupt or delay our ability to deliver finished products to our customers. For example, we purchase comp1nts in Asia for use in manufacturing in the United States and Scotland. We also regularly ship finished goods from Scotland to Europe and Asia. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposables, which are the main source of our revenues. Increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Increases in the costs of other commodities may affect our procurement costs to a lesser degree. The technologies that cover our products are the subject of active patent prosecution. There is a risk that 1 or more of our products may be determined to infringe a patent held by another party. If this were to occur we may be subject to an injunction or to payment of royalties, or both, which may adversely affect our ability to market the affected product(s). In addition, competitors may patent technological advances which may give them a competitive advantage or create barriers to entry. 15 Table of Contents Our products are made with materials which are subject to regulation by governmental agencies. Environmental regulations may prohibit the use of certain compounds in products we market and sell into regulated markets. If we are unable to substitute suitable materials into our processes, our manufacturing operations may be disrupted. In addition, we may be obligated to disclose the origin of certain materials used in our products, including but not limited to metals mined from locations which have been the site of human rights violations. We are entrusted with sensitive personal information relating to surgical patients, blood donors, employees and other persons in the course of operating our business and serving our customers. Government agencies require that we implement measures to ensure the integrity and security of such personal data and, in the event of a breach of protocol, that we inform affected individuals. If our systems were not properly designed or implemented, or should suffer a breach of security or an intrusion (e.g., hacking ) by unauthorized persons, the Company reputation could be harmed, and it could incur costs and liabilities to affected persons and enforcement agencies. We operate in an industry susceptible to significant product liability claims. These claims may be brought by individuals seeking relief on their own behalf or purporting to represent a class. In addition, product liability claims may be asserted against us in the future based on events we are not aware of at the present time. Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments N1 Item 2 Item 2 Properties
