CIK: 313143
Company Name: HAEMONETICS CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2016-06-01
Accession Number: 0000313143-16-000128


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Company Overview Haem1tics is a global healthcare company dedicated to providing innovative products to customers involved in the processing, handling and analysis of blood. We offer a comprehensive portfolio of integrated devices and information management tools with the goal of helping improve clinical outcomes and reduce costs for blood and plasma collectors, hospitals, and patients around the world. When used in this report, the terms we, us, our and the Company mean Haem1tics. Haem1tics was founded in 1971 as a medical device company a pi1er and market leader in developing and manufacturing automated blood comp1nt collection devices and surgical blood salvage devices. In May 1991, we completed an initial public offering and to this day remain an independent company. Blood and its comp1nts (plasma, platelets, and red cells) have many vital and frequently life saving clinical applications. Plasma is used for patients with major blood loss and is manufactured into pharmaceuticals to treat a variety of illnesses and hereditary disorders such as hemophilia. Red cells treat trauma patients or patients undergoing surgery with high blood loss, such as open heart surgery or organ transplant. Platelets treat cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Blood is essential to a modern healthcare system. Haem1tics develops and markets a wide range of devices and solutions to serve our customers. We provide plasma collection systems and software which enable plasma fractionators to make life saving pharmaceuticals. We provide analytical devices for measuring hemostasis which enable healthcare providers to better manage their patients bleeding risk. Haem1tics makes blood processing systems and software which make blood donation more efficient and track life giving blood comp1nts. Finally, Haem1tics supplies systems and software which facilitate blood transfusions and cell processing. Market and Products Product Lines We recently undertook a global strategic review of our business portfolio to identify which end markets and product franchises have the strongest growth opportunities. As a result of that review, we organized our current products into four franchises for purposes of evaluating their growth potential Plasma, Hemostasis Management, Donor and Cell Processing. In that review, Plasma included plasma collection devices and disposables, plasma donor management software and anticoagulant and saline sold to plasma customers. Hemostasis Management included devices and methodologies for measuring coagulation characteristics of blood, such as our TEG Hemostasis Analyzer. Donor included blood collection and processing devices and disposables for red cells, platelets and whole blood as well as related donor management software. Cell Processing included surgical blood salvage systems, specialized blood cell processing systems, disposables and blood transfusion management software. In connection with this strategic review, we concluded that Plasma and Hemostasis Management have the greatest growth potential, while Cell Processing innovation offers an opportunity to increase market share and expand into new segments. Donor is competing in challenging markets which require us to manage the business differently, including reducing costs and the scope of the current product line. In recognition of these conclusions, we have begun to implement an operating model that will streamline the management structure and rationalize our cost structure, with an aim to bring about sustainable productivity improvement across the organization. Overall, we expect implementation of our new direction will require multiple changes and will extend beyond fiscal 2017. To provide continuity while we are implementing these changes to our business approach, we are reporting our results consistent with how management viewed the business in fiscal 2016 and prior periods. In those periods, we viewed our company as serving 3 customer groups manufacturers of plasma derived pharmaceuticals, blood collectors, and hospitals. In fiscal 2016 and previous periods included within this Annual Report on Form 10 K, we have reported revenues for multiple product lines under four global product categories Plasma , Blood Center , Hospital , and Software Solutions . 1 Table of Contents In these results, Plasma includes plasma collection devices and disposables. Blood Center includes blood collection and processing devices and disposables. Hospital includes surgical blood salvage and blood demand diagnostic devices and disposables. Software Solutions includes information technology platforms and consulting services provided to all 3 markets. Although we address our customers' needs through multiple product lines, we manage our business as five operating segments based primarily on geography (a) North America Plasma, (b) Americas Blood Center and Hospital, (c) Europe, Middle East and Africa (collectively "EMEA"), (d) Asia Pacific and (e) Japan. The North America Plasma reporting unit is a separate operating segment with dedicated segment management due the size and scale of the plasma business. For financial reporting purposes, we aggregate our five operating segments into four reportable segments which include Japan EMEA North America Plasma All Other We have aggregated the following 2 operating segments into the All Other reportable segment based upon their similar operational and economic characteristics, including similarity of operating margin Americas Blood Center and Hospital Asia Pacific Segment Assets Our assets by segment are set forth below (In thousands) April 2, 2016 March 28, 2015 March 29, 2014 Japan $ 129,551 $ 146,765 $ 159,227 EMEA 249,504 305,540 329,316 North America Plasma 453,212 467,249 421,706 All Other 486,861 565,863 603,929 Total assets $ 1,319,128 $ 1,485,417 $ 1,514,178 The financial information required for segments is included herein in Note 14, Segment Information, to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Plasma The Plasma Collection Market for Fractionation Human plasma is collected and processed by bio pharmaceutical companies into therapeutic and diagnostic products that aid in the treatment of immune diseases and coagulation disorders. While plasma is also used to aid patients with extreme blood loss, such as trauma victims, bio pharmaceutical companies solely focus on plasma's pharmaceutical uses. Automated plasma collection technology allows for the safe and efficient collection of plasma. We manufacture and market automated plasma collection devices and respective disposables, but do not make plasma derived pharmaceuticals. Many bio pharmaceutical companies are vertically integrated in all comp1nts of their business and thus are now collecting and fractionating the plasma required to manufacture pharmaceuticals. This vertical integration paved the way for highly efficient plasma supply chain management and the plasma industry leverages information technology to manage operations from the point of plasma donation to fractionation to the production of the final product. Haem1tics' Plasma Products Our portfolio of products and services is designed to support multiple facets of plasma collector operations. We have a long standing commitment to understanding our customers' collection and fractionation processes. As a result, we deliver product quality and reliability; design equipment that is durable, dependable, and easy to use; comprehensive training and support, and strong business continuity practices. Historically, plasma for fractionation was collected manually, which was time consuming, labor intensive, produced relatively poor yields, and posed risk to donors. Today, the vast majority of plasma collections worldwide are performed using automated collection technology because it is safer and more cost effective. With our PCS brand automated plasma collection technology, more plasma can be collected during any 1 donation event because the other blood comp1nts are returned to the donor through the sterile disposable sets used for the plasma donation procedure. 2 Table of Contents We offer 1 stop shopping to our plasma collection customers, enabling them to source from us the full range of products necessary for plasma collection and storage, including PCS brand plasma collection equipment and disposables, plasma collection containers, and intravenous solutions such as saline. We also offer a robust portfolio of integrated information technology platforms for plasma customers to manage their donors, operations, and supply chain. Our products automate the donor interview and qualification process; streamline the workflow process in the plasma center; provide the controls necessary to evaluate donor suitability; determine the ability to release units collected; and manage unit distribution. With our software solutions, plasma collectors can manage processes across the plasma supply chain, react quickly to business changes, and identify opportunities to reduce costs. Our plasma disposables product line represented 38.4% , 35.1% , and 311% of our total revenue in fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Blood Center The Blood Collection Market for Transfusion There are millions of blood donations throughout the world every year that produce blood products for transfusion to surgical, trauma, or chronically ill patients. Patients typically receive only the blood comp1nts necessary to treat a particular clinical condition for example, red cells to surgical patients, platelets to cancer patients, and plasma to trauma victims. Platelet therapy is frequently used to alleviate the effects of chemotherapy and help patients with bleeding disorders. Red cells are often transfused to patients to replace blood lost during surgery. Red cells are also transfused to patients with blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia or aplastic anemia. Plasma, in addition to its role in creating life saving pharmaceuticals, is frequently transfused to trauma victims and to replace blood volume lost during surgery. The demand for blood comp1nts varies across the world. While overall we expect total demand to remain stable, demand in individual markets can vary greatly. Highly populated emerging market countries are seeing demand growth as they expand healthcare coverage. As greater numbers of people gain access to more advanced medical treatment, demand for blood comp1nts, plasma derived drugs, and surgical procedures increases. In more mature markets, the development of less invasive, lower blood loss procedures and better blood management has offset the demand increases from aging populations. This is particularly true in the United States, where we saw collections decline by approximately 10% in fiscal 2015 and 7% in fiscal 2016 . We expect further declines in fiscal 2017 . Most donations worldwide are manual whole blood donations. In this process, whole blood is collected from the donor and then transported to a laboratory where it is separated into its comp1nts red cells, platelets and or plasma. In addition to manual collections, there is a significant market for automated comp1nt blood collections. In this procedure, the blood separation process is automated and occurs in real time while a person is donating blood. In this separation method, only the specific blood comp1nt targeted is collected, and the remaining comp1nts are returned to the blood donor. Automated blood comp1nt collection allows significantly more of the targeted blood comp1nt to be collected during a donation event, especially red cells where our automated system supports collection of 2 units from eligible donors. Haem1tics Blood Center Products Today, Haem1tics offers automated blood comp1nt and manual whole blood collection systems to blood collection centers to collect blood products efficiently and cost effectively. We market the MCS (Multicomp1nt Collection System) brand apheresis equipment which is designed to collect specific blood comp1nts integrated from the donor. Utilizing the MCS automated platelet collection protocols, blood centers collect 1 or more therapeutic doses of platelets during a single donation. The MCS 2 unit protocol or double red cell collection device helps blood collectors optimize the collection of red cells by automating the blood separation function, eliminating the need for laboratory processing, and enabling the collection of 2 units of red cells from a single donor thus maximizing the amount of red cells collected per eligible donor and helping to mitigate red cell shortages in countries where this problem exists. Blood collectors can also use the MCS system to collect 1 unit of red cells and a "jumbo" (double) unit of plasma, or 1 unit of red cells and 1 unit of platelets from a single donor. The MCS plasma protocol, which provides the possibility of collecting 600 800ml of plasma for either transfusion to patients or for use by the pharmaceutical industry, completes the comprehensive portfolio of different blood comp1nt collection options on this device. Haem1tics also offers a portfolio of products for manual whole blood collection and processing. Haem1tics' portfolio of disposable whole blood collection and comp1nt storage sets offer flexibility in collecting a unit of whole 3 Table of Contents blood and the subsequent production and storage of the red blood cell, platelet, and or plasma products, including options for in line or dockable filters for leukoreduction of any blood comp1nt. With the ACP (Automated Cell Processor) brand, Haem1tics offers a solution to automate the washing and freezing of red cell comp1nts. The automated red cell washing procedure removes plasma proteins within the red cell units to provide a safer product for transfusion to frequently transfused patients, neonates, or patients with a history of transfusion reactions. The automated glycerolization and deglycerolization steps are required to prepare red cells for frozen storage. Freezing the red cell units can expand the shelf life of these products up to 10 years. Customers utilize this technology to implement strategic red cell inventories for catastrophe cases, storage of rare blood types, or enhanced inventory management. Our blood center disposables product line represented 34.2% , 37.3% , and 415% of our total revenue in fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Hospital The Transfusion Market for Hospitals Loss of blood is common in many surgical procedures, including open heart, trauma, transplant, vascular, and orthopedic procedures, and the need for transfusion of oxygen carrying red cells to make up for lost blood volume is routine. Patients commonly receive donor blood, referred to as allogeneic blood, which carries various risks including risk of transfusion with the wrong blood type; risk of transfusion reactions including death, but more commonly chills, fevers or other side effects that can prolong a patient recovery; and risk of transfusion of blood with a blood borne disease or infectious agent. An alternative to allogeneic blood is surgical cell salvage, also known as autotransfusion, which reduces or eliminates a patient need for blood donated from others and ensures that the patient receives the freshest and safest blood possible his or her own. Surgical cell salvage involves the collection of a patient own blood during and after surgery, for reinfusion of red cells to that patient. Blood is sucti1d from the surgical site or collected from a wound or chest drain, processed and washed through a centrifuge based system that yields concentrated red cells available for transfusion back to the patient. This process occurs in a sterile, closed circuit, single use consumable set that is fitted into an electromechanical device. We market our surgical blood salvage products to surgical specialists, primarily cardiovascular, orthopedic, and trauma surgeons, and to surgical suite service providers. Blood loss also has profound implications for a patient hemostasis or ability to effectively produce clots without causing thrombosis. Hemostasis management plays a role in various medical procedures including liver transplant, cardiovascular procedures, trauma and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). By understanding a patient clotting ability, clinicians can better plan for the patient care, deciding in advance whether to start or discontinue use of certain drugs or, determine the likelihood of the patient's need for a transfusion and which blood comp1nts will be most effective in stopping bleeding. Such planning supports better care, which can lead to lower hospital costs through a reduction in unnecessary donor blood transfusions, reduced adverse transfusion reactions, and shorter intensive care unit and hospital stays. We market our hemostasis analyzers to hospitals and laboratories as an alternative to less comprehensive blood tests. Haem1tics Hospital Products Haem1tics offers a range of blood management solutions that improve a hospital's systems for acquiring blood, storing it in the hospital, and dispensing it efficiently and correctly. Over the last few years, hospitals have become increasingly aware of their need to control costs and improve patient safety by managing blood more effectively. Our products and integrated solution platforms help hospitals optimize performance of blood acquisition, storage, and distribution. The TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer system is a blood diagnostic instrument that measures a patient's hemostasis, the ability to form and maintain blood clots. Haem1tics acquired Haemoscope Corporation and the TEG 5000 technology in 2007 and now exclusively licenses the TEG 6s technology in the hospital and labs market from Cora Healthcare, Inc., a company established by the founders of Haemoscope. We have launched the TEG 6s in certain markets in Europe and Asia. During fiscal 2016, the TEG 6s received final 510(k) clearance from the FDA in North America, our largest market for TEG, for the indications of cardiovascular surgery and cardiology procedures allowing us to launch the product in those markets. The Cell Saver system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to procedures that involve rapid, high volume blood loss, such as cardiovascular surgeries. It has become the standard of care for high blood loss surgeries. In fiscal 2012, we launched the Cell Saver Elite system, which is our most advanced autotransfusion option to minimize allogeneic blood use for surgeries with medium to high blood loss. 4 Table of Contents The OrthoPAT surgical blood salvage system is targeted to orthopedic procedures, such as hip and knee replacements, which involve slower, lower volume blood loss that often occurs well after surgery. The system is designed to remain with the patient following surgery, to recover blood and produce a washed red cell product for autotransfusion. Our hospital disposables product line represented 137% , 137% , and 133% of our total revenue in fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Software Solutions Haem1tics' Software Products and Services We have a suite of integrated software solutions for improving efficiencies and helping ensure donor and patient safety. This includes solutions for blood drive planning, donor recruitment and retention, blood collection, comp1nt manufacturing and distribution, transfusion management, and remote blood allocation. For our plasma customers, we also provide information technology platforms for managing donors and information associated with the collection of plasma products and their processing within fractionation facilities. For our Hospital customers, our software products help hospitals track and safely deliver stored blood products. SafeTrace Tx is our software solution that helps manage blood product inventory, perform patient cross matching, and manage transfusions. In addition, our BloodTrack suite of solutions manages tracking and control of blood products from the hospital blood center through to transfusion to the patient. Smart refrigerators located in or near operating suites, emergency rooms, and other parts of the hospital dispense blood units with secure control and automated traceability for efficient documentation. For Blood Center customers, our software solutions span blood center operations and automate and track operations from the recruitment of the blood donor to the disposition of the blood product. Combined, our solutions help blood collectors improve the safety, regulatory compliance, and efficiency of blood collection and supply. Our software solutions product line represented 8.0% , 7.9% , and 7.5% of our total revenue in fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Marketing Sales Distribution We market and sell our products to bio pharmaceutical companies, blood collection groups and independent blood centers, hospitals and hospital service providers, group purchasing organizations and national health organizations through our own direct sales force (including full time sales representatives and clinical specialists) as well as independent distributors. Sales representatives target the primary decision makers within each of those organizations. United States In fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 57.1% , 54.4% , and 534% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated in the U.S., where we primarily use a direct sales force to sell our products. See Note 14, Segment Information , to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 for additional information. Outside the United States In fiscal 2016 , 2015 and 2014 429% , 45.6% , and 46.6% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated through sales to non U.S. customers. Outside the United States, we use a combination of direct sales force and distributors. See Note 14, Segment Information , to our consolidated financial statement contained in Item 8 for additional information. Research and Development Our research and development centers in the United States and Switzerland ensure that protocol variations are incorporated to closely match local customer requirements. In addition, Haem1tics maintains software development operations in Canada and France. Customer collaborations are also an important part of our technical strength and competitive advantage. These collaborations with customers and transfusion experts provide us with ideas for new products and applications, enhanced protocols, and potential test sites as well as objective evaluations and expert opinions regarding technical and performance issues. The development of blood comp1nt separation products and extracorporeal blood typing and screening systems has required us to maintain technical expertise in various engineering disciplines, including mechanical, electrical, software, and biomedical engineering and material science. Innovations resulting from these various engineering efforts enable us to develop systems that are faster, smaller, and more user friendly, or that incorporate additional features important to our customer base. 5 Table of Contents Research and development expense was $45.0 million in fiscal 2016 , $54.2 million in fiscal 2015 and $54.2 million in fiscal 2014 , representing approximately 5.0% 6.0% of our net sales each year. In fiscal 2016 , research and development resources were allocated to supporting next generation plasma collection and software systems, a new TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer, and several other enhancements to our legacy product portfolios. Manufacturing Our principal manufacturing operations are located in the United States, Mexico, and Malaysia. In fiscal 2016, we completed our Value Creation and Capture ( VCC ) opportunities initiative. This initiative included (i) discontinuation of manufacturing activities at our Ascoli Piceno, Italy and Braintree, Massachusetts facilities, (ii) expansion of our current facility in Tijuana, Mexico, (iii) transfer of all equipment production to our contract manufacturer, Sanmina Corporation, and (iv) consolidation of the manufacturing of product formerly produced in the U.S. and Italy to our new manufacturing facility in Penang, Malaysia. We continue to manufacture in Bothwell, Scotland. Refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources within our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for further discussion of the costs of these activities. As part of our global strategic review, we continue to evaluate our manufacturing operations. Accordingly, we may make further changes to our manufacturing footprint based on future business conditions. In general, our production activities occur in controlled settings or clean room environments. Each step of the manufacturing and assembly process is quality checked, qualified, and validated. Critical process steps and materials are documented to ensure that every unit is produced consistently and meets performance requirements. Our equipment and disposable manufacturing sites are certified to the ISO 13485 standard and to the Medical Device Directive allowing placement of the CE mark of conformity. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposable products. Contracts with our suppliers help mitigate some of the short term effects of price volatility in this market. However, increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Contractors manufacture some comp1nt sets and equipment according to our specifications. We maintain important relationships with 2 Japanese manufacturers that produce finished disposables in Singapore, Japan, and Thailand. We have also engaged Sanmina Corporation to be the sole manufacturer of certain equipment. Certain parts and comp1nts are purchased from sole source vendors. We believe that if necessary, alternative sources of supply are available in most cases, and could be secured within a relatively short period of time. Nevertheless, an interruption in supply could temporarily interfere with production schedules and affect our operations. Our equipment is designed in house and assembled by us or our contracted manufacturers from comp1nts that are manufactured to our specifications. The completed instruments are programmed, calibrated, and tested to ensure compliance with our engineering and quality assurance specifications. Inspection checks are conducted throughout the manufacturing process to verify proper assembly and functionality. When mechanical and electronic comp1nts are sourced from outside vendors, those vendors must meet detailed qualification and process control requirements. Intellectual Property We consider our intellectual property rights to be important to our business. We rely on patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws, as well as provisions in our agreements with third parties, to protect our intellectual property rights. We hold patents in the United States and many international jurisdictions on some of our machines, processes, disposables and related technologies. These patents cover certain elements of our systems, including protocols employed in our equipment and certain aspects of our processing chambers and disposables. Our patents may cover current products, products in markets we plan to enter, or products in markets we plan to license, or the patents may be defensive in that they are directed to technologies not currently embodied in our current products. We may also license patent rights from third parties that cover technologies that we plan to use in our business. To maintain our competitive position, we rely on the technical expertise and know how of our personnel and on our patent rights. We pursue an active and formal program of invention disclosure and patent application in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. We own various trademarks that have been registered in the United States and certain other countries. Our policy is to obtain patent and trademark rights in the U.S. and foreign countries where such rights are available and we believe it is commercially advantageous to do so. However, the standards for international protection of intellectual property 6 Table of Contents vary widely. We cannot assure that pending patent and trademark applications will result in issued patents and registered trademarks, that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged or circumvented by competitors, or that our patents will not be determined invalid. Competition To remain competitive, we must continue to develop and acquire new cost effective products, information technology platforms, and business services. We believe that our ability to maintain a competitive advantage will continue to depend on a combination of factors. Some factors are largely within our control such as (i) maintenance of a positive reputation among our customers, (ii) development of new products which meet our customer's needs, (iii) obtaining regulatory approvals for our products in key markets, (iv) obtaining patents which protect our innovations, (v) development and protection of proprietary know how in important technological areas, (vi) product quality, safety and cost effectiveness and (vii) continual and rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control. We could see changes in regulatory standards or clinical practice which favor a competitor's technology or reduce revenues in key areas of our business. In addition, we face competition from several large, global companies with product offerings similar to ours, such as Terumo BCT, LivaNova Plc and Fresenius SE & Co. KGaA. Terumo and Fresenius, in particular, have significantly greater financial and other resources than we do and are strong competitors in a number of our businesses. The following provides an overview of the key competitors in each of our four global product enterprises. Plasma In the automated plasma collection market, we principally compete with the Kabi division of Fresenius, which acquired Fenwal, Inc. in November 2012, on the basis of quality, reliability, ease of use, services and technical features of the collection systems, and on the long term cost effectiveness of equipment and disposables. In China, the market is populated by local producers of a product that is intended to be similar to ours. Recently, those competitors have expanded to markets beyond China, into European and South American countries. In the field of Plasma related software, MAK Systems is the primary commercial competitor along with applications developed internally by our customers. Blood Center We have several competitors in the Blood Center product lines, some of which compete across all blood comp1nts and others that are more specialized. Terumo BCT, and Fresenius are our major competitors in platelet collection. In platelet collections, there are 2 areas of competition automated collection and pooled random donor. In the automated collection area, competition is based on continual performance improvement, as measured by the time and efficiency of platelet collection and the quality of the platelets collected. Each of these companies has taken a different technological approach in designing their systems for automated platelet collection. In addition to automated platelet collection offerings, we now also compete in the pooled random donor platelet segment from whole blood collections from which pooled platelets are derived with the Acrodose product or buffy coat pooling sets. Terumo BCT and Fresenius are also competitors in the automated red cell collection market. However, it is important to note that most double red cell collection is d1 in the U.S. and less than 10% of the red cells collected in the U.S. annually are collected via automation. Therefore, we also compete with the traditional method of collecting red cells from the manual collection of whole blood. We compete on the basis of total cost, type specific collection, process control, product quality, and inventory management. Our whole blood business faces intense competition on the basis of quality and price. In North America, Europe and Asia Pacific our main competitors are Fresenius, MacoPharma and Terumo BCT. We do not have significant whole blood revenues in Japan today. In Donor software, Sunquest Information Systems is a competitor along with systems developed internally by our customers. The competition for processing cells for storage is based on the level of automation, labor intensiveness, and system type (open versus closed). Open systems may be weaker in good manufacturing process compliance. Moreover, blood processed through open systems has a 24 hour shelf life. With the ACP (automated cell processor) brand, Haem1tics offers a closed system cell processor which gives blood processed through it, a 14 day shelf life. We compete with Terumo BCT's open systems in this market. 7 Table of Contents Hospital The TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer is used primarily in surgical applications. ROTEM is a direct competitor in Europe and in the United States. Other competitive technologies include standard coagulation tests and platelet function testing. The TEG analyzer competes with other laboratory tests based on its ability to provide a complete picture of a patient's hemostasis at a single point in time, and the ability to measure the clinically relevant platelet function for an individual patient. In the intraoperative surgical blood salvage market, competition is based on reliability, ease of use, service, support, and price. For high volume platforms, each manufacturer's technology is similar, and our Cell Saver technology competes principally with LivaNova Plc, Medtronic, and Fresenius. In the perioperative surgical blood salvage market, our OrthoPAT system competes primarily against (i) non automated processing systems whose end product is an unwashed red blood cell unit for transfusion to the patient, (ii) transfusions of donated blood and (iii) coagulation therapies such as tranexamic acid. Software Solution In the software market, we compete with MAK Systems, Mediware, Sunquest Information Systems and applications developed internally by our customers. These companies provide software to blood and plasma collectors and to hospitals for managing donors, collections, and blood units. N1 of these companies competes with Haem1tics' non software products. Our technical staff is highly skilled, but certain competitors have substantially greater financial resources and larger technical staffing at their disposal. There can be no assurance that competitors will not direct substantial efforts and resources toward the development and marketing of products competitive with those of Haem1tics. Significant Customers There were no customers that accounted for greater than 10% of our net revenues in fiscal 2016 , fiscal 2015 , or fiscal 2014 . Government Regulation Medical Device Regulation The products we manufacture and market are subject to regulation by the Center of Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ), Center for Devices and Radiological Health ( CDRH ) and the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research ("CDER") of the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ), and other non United States regulatory bodies. All medical devices introduced to the United States market since 1976 are required by the FDA, as a condition of marketing, to secure either a 510(k) pre market notification clearance or an approved premarket approval application ( PMA ). In the United States, software used to automate blood center operations and blood collections and to track those comp1nts through the system are considered by the FDA to be medical devices, subject to 510(k) pre market notification. Intravenous solutions (blood anticoagulants and solutions for storage of red blood cells) marketed by us for use with our manual collection and automated systems requires us to obtain an approved New Drug Application ( NDA ) or Abbreviated New Drug Application ( ANDA ) from CBER or CDER. A 510(k) pre market clearance indicates the FDA agreement with an applicant determination that the product for which clearance is sought is substantially equivalent to another legally marketed medical device. The process of obtaining a 510(k) clearance may involve the submission of clinical data and supporting information. The process of obtaining an NDA approval for solutions is likely to take much longer than 510(k) clearances because the FDA review process is more complicated. The FDA Quality System regulations sets forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, requires the maintenance of certain records and provides for inspections of our facilities. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacturing and marketing of our products. We maintain customer complaint files, record all lot numbers of disposable products, and conduct periodic audits to assure compliance with all regulations. We place special emphasis on customer training and advise all customers that device operation should be undertaken only by qualified personnel. The FDA can ban certain medical devices; detain or seize adulterated or misbranded medical devices; order repair, replacement or refund of these devices; and require notification of health professionals and others with regard to medical devices that present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also enjoin and restrain certain violations of 8 Table of Contents the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act pertaining to medical devices, or initiate action for criminal prosecution of such violations. We are also subject to regulation in the countries outside the United States in which we market our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directive, which creates a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to obtain CE Marking for their products. Outside of the EU, many of the regulations applicable to our products are similar to those of the FDA. However, the national health or social security organizations of certain countries require our products to be registered by those countries before they can be marketed in those countries. We have complied with these regulations and have obtained such registrations where we market our products. Federal, state and foreign regulations regarding the manufacture and sale of products such as ours are subject to change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, such changes might have on our business. Conflict Minerals The Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act imposes disclosure requirements regarding the use of "Conflict Minerals" mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo and adjoining countries in products, whether or not these products are manufactured by third parties. The conflict minerals include tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold, and their derivatives. These requirements could affect the pricing, sourcing and availability of minerals used in the manufacture of our products. There will be additional costs associated with complying with the disclosure requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products. Our supply chain is complex and we may be unable to verify the origins for all metals used in our products. Other Regulation We are also subject to various environmental, health and general safety laws, directives and regulations both in the U.S. and abroad. Our operations, like those of other medical device companies, involve the use of substances regulated under environmental laws, primarily in manufacturing and sterilization processes. We believe that sound environmental, health and safety performance contributes to our competitive strength while benefiting our customers, shareholders and employees. Environmental Matters Failure to comply with international, federal and local environmental protection laws or regulations could have an adverse impact on our business or could require material capital expenditures. We continue to monitor changes in U.S. and international environmental regulations that may present a significant risk to the business, including laws or regulations relating to the manufacture or sale of products using plastics. Employees As of April 2, 2016 , we employed the full time equivalent of 3,225 persons assigned to the following functional areas manufacturing, 1,845 ; sales and marketing, 688 ; general and administrative, 258 ; research and development, 186 ; and quality control and field service, 248 . Availability of Reports and Other Information All of our corporate governance materials, including the Principles of Corporate Governance, the Business Conduct Policy and the charters of the Audit, Compensation, and Nominating and Governance Committees are published on the Investor Relations section of our website at http phx.corporate ir.net phoenix.zhtml?c=72118&p=irol IRHome . On this web site the public can also access, free of charge, our annual, quarterly and current reports and other documents filed or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Information Statements contained in this report, as well as oral statements we make which are prefaced with the words may, will, expect, anticipate, continue, estimate, project, intend, designed, and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect our future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. These statements are based on our current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which we can give no firm assurance. Further, any forward looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. As it is not possible to 9 Table of Contents predict every new factor that may emerge, forward looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of our actual future financial condition or results. These forward looking statements, like any forward looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated, including the effects of disruption from the manufacturing transformation making it more difficult to maintain relationships with employees and timely deliver high quality products, changes in executive management, changes in operations as a result of our global strategic review, asset revaluations to reflect current business conditions, technological advances in the medical field and standards for transfusion medicine and our ability to successfully implement products that incorporate such advances and standards, demand for whole blood and blood comp1nts, product quality, market acceptance, regulatory uncertainties, including the receipt or timing of regulatory approvals, the effect of economic and political conditions, the impact of competitive products and pricing, blood product reimbursement policies and practices, foreign currency exchange rates, changes in customers ordering patterns including single source tenders, the effect of industry consolidation as seen in the plasma and blood center markets, the effect of communicable diseases and the effect of uncertainties in markets outside the U.S. (including Europe and Asia) in which we operate and other risks detailed under Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report. The foregoing list should not be construed as exhaustive. 10 Table of Contents ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information contained in this Annual Report and the exhibits hereto, the following risk factors should be considered carefully in evaluating our business. Our business, financial condition, cash flows or results of operations could be materially adversely affected by any of these risks. This section contains forward looking statements. You should refer to the explanation of the qualifications and limitations on forward looking statements at the end of Item 1 and Item 7 of this Annual Report. We recently completed a global strategic review of our business. If our new strategic direction does not yield the expected results or we fail to implement the necessary changes to our operations, we could see material adverse effects on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We recently undertook a global strategic review of our business portfolio to identify which end markets and product franchises have the strongest growth opportunities. As a result of that review, we organized our current products into four franchises for purposes of evaluating their growth potential Plasma , Hemostasis Management , Donor and Cell Processing. We concluded that Plasma and Hemostasis Management have the greatest growth potential, while Cell Processing innovation offers an opportunity to increase market share and expand into new segments. We believe Donor is competing in challenging markets which require us to manage the business differently, including reducing costs and the scope of the current product line. If we have not correctly identified the franchises with greatest growth potential, we will not allocate our resources appropriately which will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Further, if we are unable to reduce costs and complexity in our Donor franchise, we will obtain lower than expected cash flows to fund our future growth and capital needs. This could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and results of operations. If we are unable to successfully expand our product lines through internal research & development and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Continued growth of our business depends on our maintaining a pipeline of profitable new products and successful improvements to our existing products. This requires accurate market analysis and carefully targeted application of intellectual and financial resources toward technological innovation or acquisition of new products. The creation and adoption of technological advances is only 1 step. We must also efficiently develop the technology into a product which confers a competitive advantage, represents a cost effective solution or provides improved patient care. Finally, as a part of the regulatory process of obtaining marketing clearance for new products, we conduct and participate in numerous clinical trials, the results of which may be unfavorable, or perceived as unfavorable by the market, and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. The risks of missteps and set backs are an inherent part of the innovation and development processes in the medical device industry. If we are unable to successfully grow our business through business relationships and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Promising partnerships and acquisitions may not be completed for reasons such as competition among prospective partners or buyers, our inability to reach satisfactory terms, or the need for regulatory approvals. Any acquisition that we complete may be dilutive to earnings and require the investment of significant resources. The economic environment may constrain our ability to access the capital needed for acquisitions and other capital investments. A significant portion of our revenue derives from the sale of blood collection supplies. Declines in the number of blood collection procedures have adversely impacted our business and future declines may have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Sales to blood collectors represented 39.7% of our consolidated disposables revenues in fiscal 2016 . In certain markets, changes in medical protocols and the development of less invasive, lower blood loss procedures has reduced the number of transfusions of red blood cells, which has in turn led to a decline in the number of blood collection procedures. This is particularly true in the United States where we saw collections decline by approximately 10% and 7% in fiscal 2015 and 2016 , respectively. We expect this trend to continue further in fiscal 2017 . In response to this trend, certain large U.S. blood center collection groups pursued single source vendors for whole blood collection products which required significant reductions in average selling prices in order to retain or increase our share of their business. During fiscal 2014, we entered into a multi year agreement to supply the HemeXcel Purchasing Alliance, LLC with certain whole blood collection comp1nts during the calendar years 2014 2016. The agreement included a reduction in average selling prices which was implemented at the end of first quarter of fiscal 2015. In March 2014, the American Red Cross selected another exclusive supplier to provide certain whole blood products. This reduced annualized revenues by approximately $25.0 million beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2015. 11 Table of Contents During the first half of fiscal 2016, the American Red Cross and 2 group purchasing organizations representing other U.S. blood collectors ("Blood Center GPOs") pursued arrangements for apheresis red cell collections. These negotiations have concluded and will negatively affect red cell revenues and gross margins, a negative impact of approximately $12 million is expected on fiscal 2017 operating income. Consolidation of the healthcare providers and blood collectors has increased demand for price concessions and caused the exclusion of suppliers from significant market segments, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Political, economic and policy influences are causing the healthcare and blood collection industries to make substantial structural and financial changes that will continue affecting our results of operations. Government and private sector initiatives limiting the growth of healthcare costs and causing healthcare delivery structure reforms, including the reduction in blood use reduced payments for care. These trends have placed greater pricing pressure on suppliers, decreased average selling prices and increased the number of sole source relationships. This pressure impacts our Hospital and Blood Center businesses. The expansion among hospitals in the United States of group purchasing organizations, integrated delivery ne2rks and large single accounts directly puts price pressure on our Hospital business. It also puts price pressure on our United States Blood Center customers who are also facing reduced demand for red cells. Our Blood Center customers have responded to this pressure by creating their own group purchasing organizations and resorting to single source tenders to create incentives for suppliers, including us, to significantly reduce prices. We expect that market demand, government regulation, third party reimbursement policies, government contracting requirements and societal pressures will continue to change the worldwide healthcare industry, resulting in further business consolidations and alliances among our customers and competitors. This may exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products and adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. Quality problems with our processes, goods, and services could harm our reputation for producing high quality products and erode our competitive advantage, sales, and market share. Quality is extremely important to us and our customers due to the serious and costly consequences of product failure. Our quality certifications are critical to the marketing success of our products and services. If we fail to meet these standards or fail to adapt to evolving standards, our reputation could be damaged, we could lose customers, and our revenue and results of operations could decline. As approximately half of our revenue comes from outside the United States, we are subject to currency fluctuation, geopolitical risk, economic volatility, anti corruption laws, export and import restrictions, local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. We do business in over 100 countries and have distributors in approximately 90 countries. This exposes us to currency fluctuation, geopolitical risk, economic volatility, anti corruption laws, export and import restrictions, local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. If there are sanctions or restrictions on the flow of capital which prevent product importation or receipt of payments in Russia or China, our business could be adversely affected. Our international operations are governed by the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and other similar anti corruption laws in other countries. Generally, these laws prohibit companies and their business partners or other intermediaries from making improper payments to foreign governments and government officials in order to obtain or retain business. Global enforcement of such anti corruption laws has increased in recent years, including aggressive investigations and enforcement proceedings. While we have an active compliance program and various other safeguards to discourage impermissible practices, we have distributors in 90 countries, several of which are considered high risk for corruption. As a result, our global operations carry some risk of unauthorized impermissible activity on the part of 1 of our distributors, employees, agents or consultants. Any alleged or actual violation could subject us to government scrutiny, severe criminal or civil fines, or sanctions on our ability to export product outside the U.S., which could adversely affect our reputation and financial condition. Export of U.S. technology or goods manufactured in the United States to some jurisdictions requires special U.S. export authorization or local market controls that may be influenced by factors, including political dynamics, outside our control. Finally, any other significant changes in the competitive, legal, regulatory, reimbursement or economic environments of the jurisdictions in which we conduct our international business could have a material impact on our business. 12 Table of Contents Our future success depends on the continued services of skilled personnel. We constantly monitor the dynamics of the economy, the healthcare industry and the markets in which we compete; and we continue to assess our key personnel that we believe are essential to our long term success. Over the last year, we have transiti1d to a new Chief Executive Officer, are in the process of hiring a new Chief Financial Officer and have hired new personnel in a number of key executive positions. We have also effected significant organizational and strategic changes in connection therewith. If we fail to effectively manage our ongoing organizational and strategic changes, including the timely identification of a new Chief Financial Officer, our financial condition, results of operations, and reputation, as well as our ability to successfully attract, motivate and retain key employees, could be harmed. Our success also depends upon our ability to attract and retain other qualified managerial and technical personnel. Competition for such personnel is intense. We may not be able to attract and retain personnel necessary for the development of our business. If we are unable to meet our debt obligations or experience a disruption in our cash flows, it could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, ability to complete our share repurchase program or cost of borrowing. We have $408.1 million of debt outstanding at April 2, 2016 . The obligations to pay interest and repay the borrowed amounts may restrict our ability to adjust to adverse economic conditions, our ability to fund working capital, capital expenditures, acquisition or other general corporate requirements. The interest rate on the loan is variable and subject to change based on market forces. Fluctuations in interest rates could adversely affect our profitability and cash flows. In addition, as a global corporation we have significant cash reserves held in foreign countries. These balances may not be immediately available to repay our debt. Our credit facilities contain financial covenants that require us to maintain specified financial ratios and make interest and principal payments. If we are unable to satisfy these covenants, we may be required to obtain waivers from our lenders and no assurance can be made that our lenders would grant such waivers on favorable terms, or at all, and we could be required to repay any borrowed amounts on short notice. Additional capital that we may require in the future may not be available to us, or only available to us on unfavorable terms. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including operating requirements, current and future acquisitions and the need to refinance existing debt. Our ability to issue additional debt or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected by our debt levels, unfavorable changes in economic conditions generally or uncertainties that affect the capital markets. Higher borrowing costs or the inability to access capital markets could adversely affect our ability to support future growth and operating requirements and, as a result, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected. As of April 2, 2016, we had $408.1 million of debt obligations due prior to July 1, 2019. Refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources within our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for further discussion on debt obligations. We recorded goodwill and other asset impairment charges during the current fiscal year and may record additional charges in future periods. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually, or on an interim basis between annual tests when events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. During the third quarter of fiscal 2016, we concluded that indicators of potential goodwill impairment were present for the EMEA and Americas Blood Center and Hospital reporting units, therefore requiring an interim test for goodwill impairment. We recorded a preliminary impairment charge of $66.3 million in the EMEA reporting unit during the third quarter of fiscal 2016. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we completed our goodwill impairment test and concluded that no adjustment to the $66.3 million impairment loss initially recorded was required. The impairment charge recorded in the third quarter of fiscal 2016 represented the entire goodwill balance allocated to EMEA. This charge does not impact our liquidity, cash flows from operations, future operations, or compliance with debt covenants. Although the analysis indicated only the EMEA reporting unit was impaired, we will continue to monitor the Americas Blood Center and Hospital, which has an excess fair value over carrying value of approximately 25.8% and has allocated goodwill of $175.9 million , as this operating unit is most at risk in future periods if our estimated future cash flows differ from our actual operating results. Additionally, during the third quarter of fiscal 2016 we recorded an impairment charge of $18.7 million to write down the carrying value of the SOLX intangible assets after we updated our assessment of the market potential for the SOLX technology and concluded that it was no longer commercially reasonable to bring this technology to market. Finally, during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we completed our global strategic review which resulted in the identification of certain long lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and intangible assets that were at risk of being impaired due 13 Table of Contents to changes in the strategic direction of the Company. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2016, we performed impairment tests for each of the identified assets and based on revised expectations, we recorded asset impairment charges of $16.2 million. Goodwill impairment charges or other asset impairment charges could materially adversely impact our results of operations in the period in which they are recorded. We will continue to monitor our intangible assets for potential impairments in future periods. Refer to Critical Accounting Policies within our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for a discussion of key assumptions used in our testing. As a medical device manufacturer we are subject to a number of laws and regulations. Non compliance with those laws or regulations could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The manufacture, distribution and marketing of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other non United States regulatory bodies. We must obtain specific regulatory clearance prior to selling any new product or service, a process which is costly and time consuming. If we are unable to obtain the necessary regulatory clearance we will be unable to introduce new enhanced product. Our operations are also subject to continuous review and monitoring by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Failure to substantially comply with applicable regulations could subject our products to recall or seizure by government authorities, or an order to suspend manufacturing activities. If our products were determined to have design or manufacturing flaws, this could result in their recall or seizure. Either of these situations could also result in the imposition of fines. Many of our competitors have significantly greater financial means and resources, which may allow them to more rapidly develop new technologies and more quickly address changes in customer requirements. Our ability to remain competitive depends on a combination of factors. Certain factors are within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety, cost effectiveness and continued rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control such as regulatory standards, medical standards, reimbursement policies and practices, and the practice of medicine. Loss of a significant customer could adversely affect our business. In fiscal 2016 , although no 1 customer represented more than 10% of our revenues, our ten largest customers accounted for 36.0% of our revenue. If any of our largest customers materially reduce their purchases from us or terminate their relationship with us for any reason, we could experience an adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. We may not continue to realize the benefits from our Value Creation and Capture initiatives. In fiscal 2016, we completed our multi year Value Creation and Capture initiatives. These initiatives have reduced manufacturing costs and improved supply chain efficiency. However, there are no assurances the cost savings or supply chain efficiencies will continue as our business evolves. In addition, the activities involved the relocation of several product lines to new manufacturing facilities. As these transitions are completed, we may yet experience challenges with the new manufacturing locations, additional costs, or unacceptable quality. These may lead to additional working capital, warranty or inventory costs. An interruption in our ability to manufacture our products or an inability to obtain key comp1nts or raw materials may adversely affect our business. Certain key products are manufactured at single locations, with limited alternate facilities. If an event occurs that results in damage to 1 or more of our facilities, we may be unable to manufacture the relevant products at previous levels or at all. In addition, for reasons of quality assurance or cost effectiveness, we purchase certain finished goods, comp1nts and raw materials from sole suppliers, notably JMS Co. Ltd., Kawasumi Laboratories and Sanmina Corporation. Due to the stringent regulations and requirements of the FDA and other similar non U.S. regulatory agencies regarding the manufacture of our products, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for certain comp1nts or materials. A reduction or interruption in manufacturing, or an inability to secure alternative sources of raw materials or comp1nts, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. Current or worsening economic conditions may adversely affect our business and financial condition. A portion of our trade accounts receivable outside the United States include sales to government owned or supported healthcare systems in several countries, which are subject to payment delays. Payment is dependent upon the financial stability and credi2rthiness of those countries national economies. Worsening economic conditions may lead to the rationing of care or reduced order patterns. Although, we have not incurred significant losses on government receivables to date, we continually evaluate all government receivables for potential collection risks associated with the availability of government funding and reimbursement practices. If the financial condition of customers or the countries healthcare systems deteriorate such that their ability to make payments is uncertain, allowances may be required in future periods. 14 Table of Contents As a global corporation, we are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could adversely affect our cash flows and results of operations. International revenues and expenses account for a substantial portion of our operations and we intend to continue expanding our presence in international markets. In fiscal 2016 , our international revenues accounted for 429% of our total revenues. The exposure to fluctuations in currency exchange rates takes different forms. Reported revenues, as well as manufacturing and operational costs denominated in foreign currencies by our international businesses, fluctuate due to exchange rate movement when translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. Fluctuations in exchange rates could adversely affect our profitability in U.S. dollars of products and services sold by us into international markets, where payment for our products and services and related manufacturing and operational costs is made in local currencies. We are entrusted with sensitive personal information relating to surgical patients, blood donors, employees and other persons in the course of operating our business and serving our customers. Government agencies require that we implement measures to ensure the integrity and security of such personal data and, in the event of a breach of protocol, we inform affected individuals. If our systems are not properly designed or implemented, or should suffer a breach of security or an intrusion (e.g., hacking ) by unauthorized persons, the Company reputation could be harmed, and it could incur costs and liabilities to affected persons and enforcement agencies. We rely on the proper function, availability and security of information technology systems to operate our business and to serve our customers and a cyber attack or other breach of these systems could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We rely on information technology systems to process, transmit, and store electronic information in our day to day operations. Similar to other large multi national companies, the size and complexity of our information technology systems makes them vulnerable to a cyber attack, malicious intrusion, breakdown, destruction, loss of data privacy, or other significant disruption. Our information systems require an ongoing commitment of significant resources to maintain, protect, and enhance existing systems and develop new systems to keep pace with continuing changes in information processing technology, evolving systems and regulatory standards, the increasing need to protect patient and customer information, and changing customer patterns. In addition, third parties may attempt to hack into our products to obtain data relating to patients with our products or our proprietary information. Any failure by us to maintain or protect our information technology systems and data integrity, including from cyber attacks, intrusions or other breaches, could result in the unauthorized access to patient data and personally identifiable information, theft of intellectual property or other misappropriation of assets, or otherwise compromise our confidential or proprietary information and disrupt our operations. Any of these events, in turn, may cause us to lose existing customers, have difficulty preventing, detecting, and controlling fraud, have disputes with customers, physicians, and other health care professionals, be subject to legal claims and liability, have regulatory sanctions or penalties imposed, have increases in operating expenses, incur expenses or lose revenues as a result of a data privacy breach or theft of intellectual property, or suffer other adverse consequences, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We are subject to the risks associated with communicable diseases. A significant outbreak of a disease could reduce the demand for our products and affect our ability to provide our customers with products and services. An eligible donor willingness to donate is affected by concerns about their personal health and safety. Concerns about communicable diseases (such as pandemic flu, SARS, or HIV) could reduce the number of donors, and accordingly reduce the demand for our products for a period of time. A significant outbreak of a disease could also affect our employees ability to work, which could limit our ability to produce product and service our customers. There is a risk that the Company intellectual property may be subject to misappropriation in some countries. Certain countries, particularly China, do not enforce compliance with laws that protect intellectual property ( IP ) rights with the same degree of vigor as is available under the U.S. and European systems of justice. Further, certain of the Company IP rights are not registered in China, or if they were, have since expired. This may permit others to produce copies of products in China that are not covered by currently valid patent registrations. There is also a risk that such products may be exported from China to other countries. In order to aggressively protect our IP throughout the world, we have a program of patent disclosures and filings in markets where we conduct significant business. While we believe this program is reasonable and adequate, the risk of loss is inherent in litigation as different legal systems offer different levels of protection to IP, and it is still possible that even patented technologies may not be protected absolutely from infringement. 15 Table of Contents Pending and future intellectual property litigation could be costly and disruptive to us. We operate in an industry that is susceptible to significant intellectual property litigation. This type of litigation is expensive, complex and lengthy and its outcome is difficult to predict. Patent litigation may result in adverse outcomes and could significantly divert the attention of our technical and management personnel. The technologies that support our products are the subject of active patent prosecution. There is a risk that 1 or more of our products may be determined to infringe a patent held by another party. If this were to occur we may be subject to an injunction or to payment of royalties, or both, which may adversely affect our ability to market the affected product(s). In addition, competitors may patent technological advances which may give them a competitive advantage or create barriers to entry. We sell our products in certain emerging economies. There are risks with doing business in emerging economies, such as Brazil, Russia, India and China. These economies tend to have less mature product regulatory systems, and more volatile financial markets. In addition, the government controlled health care system's ability to invest in our products and systems may abruptly shift due to changing government priorities or funding capacity. Our ability to sell products in these economies is dependent upon our ability to hire qualified employees or agents to represent our products locally, and our ability to obtain and maintain the necessary regulatory approvals in a less mature regulatory environment. If we are unable to retain qualified representatives or maintain the necessary regulatory approvals, we will not be able to continue to sell products in these markets. We are exposed to a higher degree of financial risk if we extend credit to customers in these economies. In many of the international markets in which we do business, including certain parts of Europe, South America, the Middle East, Russia and Asia, our employees, agents or distributors offer to sell our products in response to public tenders issued by various governmental agencies. There is additional risk in selling our products through agents or distributors, particularly in public tenders. If they misrepresent our products, do not provide appropriate service and delivery, or commit a violation of local or U.S. law, our reputation could be harmed, and we could be subject to fines, sanctions or both. We have a complex global supply chain which includes key sole source suppliers. We have a complex global supply chain which involves integrating key suppliers and our manufacturing capacity into a global movement of comp1nts and finished goods. We have certain key suppliers, including JMS Co. Ltd. ("JMS"), Kawasumi Laboratories ("Kawasumi") and Sanmina Corporation, who have their own complex supply chains. JMS and Kawasumi make certain finished goods and important sub comp1nts in locations throughout Asia. We have engaged Sanmina Corporation to be the sole manufacturer of certain equipment as part of our manufacturing ne2rk optimization activities. Any disruption to 1 or more of our suppliers production or delivery of sufficient volumes of subcomp1nts conforming to our specifications could disrupt or delay our ability to deliver finished products to our customers. For example, we purchase comp1nts in Asia for use in manufacturing in the United States, Puerto Rico, Mexico and Scotland. We also regularly ship finished goods from the United States, Puerto Rico, Mexico and Scotland to Europe and Asia. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposables, which are the main source of our revenues. Any change in the price, composition or availability of the plastics we purchase could adversely affect our business. We have 3 risks with this key raw material price, composition and availability. Increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Increases in the costs of other commodities may affect our procurement costs to a lesser degree. The composition of the plastic we purchase is also important. Today, we purchase plastics which contain phthalates, which are used to make plastic malleable. Should plastics with phthalates become unavailable due to regulatory changes, we may be required to obtain new FDA or foreign approvals for a number of products. While we have not experienced shortages in the past, any interruption in the supply for certain plastics could have a material impact on our business by limiting our ability to manufacture and sell the products which represent a significant portion of our revenues. 16 Table of Contents Our products are made with materials which are subject to regulation by governmental agencies. Environmental regulations may prohibit the use of certain compounds in products we market and sell in regulated markets. If we are unable to substitute suitable materials into our processes, our manufacturing operations may be disrupted. In addition, we may be obligated to disclose the origin of certain materials used in our products, including but not limited to, metals mined from locations which have been the site of human rights violations. We operate in an industry susceptible to significant product liability claims. Our products are relied upon by medical personnel in connection with the treatment of patients and the collection of blood from donors. In the event that patients or donors sustain injury or death in connection with their condition or treatment, we, along with others, may be sued, and whether or not we are ultimately determined to be liable, we may incur significant legal expenses. These claims may be brought by individuals seeking relief on their own behalf or purporting to represent a class. In addition, product liability claims may be asserted against us in the future based on events we are not aware of at the present time. In addition, such litigation could damage our reputation and, therefore, impair our ability to market our products, obtain professional or product liability insurance, or increase the cost of such insurance. While we believe that our current product liability insurance coverage is sufficient, there is no assurance that such coverage will be adequate to cover incurred liabilities or that we will be able to obtain acceptable product and professional liability coverage in the future. We have disclosed a material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to our accounting for income taxes, which could adversely affect our ability to report our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows accurately and on a timely basis. In connection with our assessment of internal controls over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002, we identified a material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to our accounting for income taxes. For a discussion of our internal controls over financial reporting and a description of the identified material weakness, see "Controls and Procedures" in I, Item 9A of this Report. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal controls over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Management's assessment identified control deficiencies associated with the transition from utilizing tax consultants to establishing expanded in house tax capabilities and resources, as well as issues in the design and implementation of controls to review and analyze the Company's income tax provisions, income taxes payable and receivable, and deferred income tax balances that led management to conclude that control deficiencies existed at April 2, 2016. While reported tax provisions and related accounts are believed to be accurate, as a result of these deficiencies, until they are substantially remediated, it is possible that internal controls over financial reporting may not prevent or detect errors in the tax accounting reflected in our financial statements from occurring that could be material, either individually or in the aggregate. While actions have been taken to improve our internal controls in response to the identified material weakness related to certain aspects of accounting for income taxes, additional work continues to address and remediate the identified material weakness. Until these actions are fully implemented and tested, a material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to income taxes will continue to exist. As a result, our ability to accurately report, on a timely basis, our future financial condition, results of operations or cash flows may be adversely affected. 17 Table of Contents ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
