CIK: 313927
Company Name: CHURCH DWIGHT CO INC DE 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2012-02-24
Accession Number: 0001193125-12-077495


ITEM 1 BUSINESS GENERAL The Company, founded in 1846, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of household, personal care and specialty products. The Company focuses its marketing efforts principally on its eight power brands. These well recognized brand names include ARM & HAMMER, (used in multiple product categories such as baking soda, carpet deodorization and laundry detergent), TROJAN Condoms, XTRA laundry detergent, OXICLEAN pre wash laundry additive, NAIR depilatories, FIRST RESPONSE home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ORAJEL oral analgesics and SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes. The Company business is divided into 3 primary segments, Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products. The Consumer Domestic segment includes the eight power brands and other household and personal care products such as SCRUB FREE, KABOOM and ORANGE GLO cleaning products, ANSWER home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ARRID antiperspirant, and CLOSE UP and AIM toothpastes. The Consumer International segment primarily sells a variety of personal care products, some of which use the same brands as our domestic product lines, in international markets, including Canada, France, Australia, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Brazil and China. The Specialty Products segment is the largest U.S. producer of sodium bicarbonate, which it sells together with other specialty inorganic chemicals for a variety of industrial, institutional, medical and food applications. This segment also sells a range of animal nutrition and specialty cleaning products. In 2011, the Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products segments represented approximately 72%, 19% and 9%, respectively, of the Company net sales. All domestic brand rankings contained in this report are based on dollar share rankings from AC Nielsen Food, Drug, Mass ( FDM ) excluding Wal Mart for the 52 weeks ending December 24, 2011 Foreign brand rankings are derived from several sources. 2011 DEVELOPMENTS New Manufacturing Facility During the first quarter of 2011, the Company announced its decision to relocate a portion of its Green River, Wyoming operations to a newly leased site in Victorville, California in the first half of 2012 Specifically, the Company will be relocating its cat litter manufacturing operations and distribution center to this southern California site to be closer to transportation hubs and its West Coast customers. The site will also produce liquid laundry detergent products and is expandable to meet business needs for the foreseeable future. The Company sodium bicarbonate operations and other consumer product manufacturing will remain at the Green River facility. 2 for 1 stock split On June 1, 2011, the Company effected a 2 for 1 stock split of the Company Common Stock in the form of a 100% stock dividend. All applicable amounts in the consolidated financial statements and related disclosures have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the stock split. BATISTE Acquisition On June 28, 2011, the Company acquired the BATISTE dry shampoo brand from Vivalis, Limited ( BATISTE Acquisition ) for cash consideration of $64.8 million. The Company paid for the acquisition from available cash. BATISTE annual sales are approximately $20.0 million. The BATISTE brand is managed principally within the Consumer International segment. 1 Table of Contents New Corporate Office Building On July 20, 2011, the Company entered into a 20 year lease for a new corporate headquarters building that will be constructed in Ewing, New Jersey (approximately 10 miles from the Company existing corporate headquarters in Princeton, New Jersey) to meet office space needs for the foreseeable future. Based on current expectations that the facility will be completed and occupied beginning in early 2013, the lease will expire in 2033 The Company lease commitment is approximately $116 million over the lease term. In conjunction with its lease of the new headquarters building, the Company will be vacating 3 leased facilities adjacent to its current Princeton headquarters facility. Share Repurchase Authorization On August 4, 2011, the Company announced that the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $300 million of the Company Common Stock. Any purchases may be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, subject to market conditions, corporate and legal requirements and other factors. There is no expiration date on the stock repurchase authorization, and the Company is not obligated to acquire any specific number of shares. The Company purchased 18 million shares at a cost of $80.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 New Joint Venture On September 22, 2011, the Company, together with FMC Corporation and TATA Chemicals, formed an operating joint venture, Natronx Technologies LLC ( Natronx ). The Company has a 1 third ownership interest in Natronx, and its investment is accounted for under the equity method. The joint venture will engage in the manufacturing and marketing of sodium based, dry sorbents for air pollution control in electric utility and industrial boiler operations. The sorbents, primarily sodium bicarbonate and trona, are used by coal fired utilities to remove harmful pollutants, such as acid gases, in flue gas treatment processes. Natronx intends to invest approximately $60 million to construct a 450,000 ton per year facility in Wyoming to produce trona sorbents by the fourth quarter of 2012, the cost of which will be equally shared among all members. The joint venture started business in the fourth quarter of 2011 and the Company made an initial investment of approximately $3 million and is committed to investing upwards of an additional $17 million in 2012 Commercial Paper Notes In the third quarter of 2011, the Company entered into an agreement with 2 banks to establish a commercial paper program (the Program ). Under the Program, the Company may issue notes from time to time up to an aggregate principal amount outstanding at any given time of $500 million. The maturities of the notes will vary but may not exceed 397 days. The notes will be sold under customary terms in the commercial paper market and will be issued at a discount to par or, alternatively, will be sold at par and will bear varying interest rates based on a fixed or floating rate basis. The interest rates will vary based on market conditions and the ratings assigned to the notes by the credit rating agencies at the time of issuance. Subject to market conditions, the Company intends to utilize the Program as its primary short term borrowing facility and does not intend to sell unsecured commercial paper notes in excess of the available amount under the revolving credit agreement. If, for any reason, the Company is unable to access the commercial paper market, the revolving credit agreement ( Credit Agreement ) would be utilized to meet the Company short term liquidity needs. The Company recently amended its Credit Agreement to support the Program. Total combined borrowing for both the Credit Agreement and the Program may not exceed $500 million. Additionally the Credit Agreement was also extended through August 4, 2016. The Company did not issue any notes in 2011 As a result of this Program, the Company terminated its accounts receivable securitization facility as the Program has a lower interest rate than the securitization facility. 2 Table of Contents Information Systems Upgrade The Company recently upgraded its U.S. and Canadian information systems and plans to do so for certain foreign subsidiaries currently scheduled during 2012 The Company estimated a sales increase in the fourth quarter of approximately $9.0 million due to orders from customers in advance of the U.S. implementation. Brazil Chemical Business The Company is exploring strategic options for its chemical business in Brazil. The business, which has annual revenues of approximately $40 million, markets sodium bicarbonate, dairy products and other chemicals in Brazil. The net assets associated with a portion of this business have been classified as held for sale for financial statement reporting purposes as of December 31, 2011 FINANCIAL INFORMATION ABOUT SEGMENTS As noted above, the Company business is organized into 3 reportable segments, Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products ( SPD ). These segments are based on differences in the nature of products and organizational and ownership structures. The businesses of these segments generally are not seasonal, although the Consumer Domestic and Consumer International segments are affected by sales of SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes, which typically are higher during the fall, in advance of the holiday season, and sales of NAIR depilatories and waxes, which typically are higher in the spring and summer months. Information concerning the net sales, operating income and identifiable assets of each of the segments is set forth in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report and in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, which is Item 7 of this report. CONSUMER PRODUCTS Consumer Domestic Principal Products The Company founders first marketed baking soda in 1846 for use in home baking. Today, this product has a wide variety of uses in the home, including as a refrigerator and freezer deodorizer, scratch free cleaner and deodorizer for kitchen surfaces and cooking appliances, bath additive, dentifrice, cat litter deodorizer and swimming pool pH stabilizer. The Company specializes in baking soda based products, as well as other products which use the same raw materials or technology or are sold in the same markets. In addition, this segment includes other deodorizing and household cleaning products, as well as laundry and personal care products. The following table sets forth the principal products of the Company Consumer Domestic segment. Type of Product Key Brand Names Household ARM & HAMMER Pure Baking Soda ARM & HAMMER and XTRA Powder and Liquid Laundry Detergents ARM & HAMMER Carpet & Room Deodorizers ARM & HAMMER Cat Litter Deodorizer ARM & HAMMER Clumping Cat Litters ARM & HAMMER FRESH N SOFT Fabric Softeners ARM & HAMMER Total 2 in 1 Dryer Cloths ARM & HAMMER Super Washing Soda SCRUB FREE Bathroom Cleaners CLEAN SHOWER Daily Shower Cleaner CAMEO Aluminum & Stainless Steel Cleaner SNO BOL Toilet Bowl Cleaner XTRA and NICE N FLUFFY Fabric Softeners DELICARE Fine Fabric Wash OXICLEAN Detergent and Cleaning Solution KABOOM Cleaning Products ORANGE GLO Cleaning Products FELINE PINE Cat Litter 3 Table of Contents Type of Product Key Brand Names Personal Care ARM & HAMMER Toothpastes SPINBRUSH Battery operated Toothbrushes MENTADENT Toothpaste, Toothbrushes AIM Toothpaste PEPSODENT Toothpaste CLOSE UP Toothpaste RIGIDENT Denture Adhesive ARM & HAMMER Deodorants & Antiperspirants ARRID Antiperspirants LADY S CHOICE Antiperspirants TROJAN Condoms and Vibrating Products FIRST RESPONSE Home Pregnancy and Ovulation Test Kits ANSWER Home Pregnancy and Ovulation Test Kits NAIR Depilatories, Lotions, Creams and Waxes ORAJEL Oral Analgesics SIMPLY SALINE Nasal Saline Moisturizer CARTERS LITTLE PILLS Laxative Household Products In 2011, household products constituted approximately 65% of the Company Domestic Consumer sales and approximately 47% of the Company total sales. The ARM & HAMMER trademark was adopted in 1867. ARM & HAMMER Baking Soda remains the leading brand of baking soda in terms of consumer recognition of the brand name and reputation for quality and value. The deodorizing properties of baking soda have led to the development of several household products. For example, the Company markets ARM & HAMMER FRIDGE FRESH, a refrigerator deodorizer equipped with a baking soda filter to keep food tasting fresher. In addition, ARM & HAMMER Carpet and Room Deodorizer is the number 1 brand in the domestic carpet and room deodorizer market. The Company laundry detergents constitute its largest consumer business, measured by net sales. The Company markets its ARM & HAMMER brand laundry detergents, in both powder and liquid forms, as value products, priced at a discount from products identified by the Company as market leaders. The Company markets its XTRA laundry detergent in both powder and liquid at a slightly lower price than ARM & HAMMER brand laundry detergents. The Company also markets XTRA SCENTSATIONS, a highly fragranced and concentrated liquid laundry detergent, and OXICLEAN pre wash laundry additive. OXICLEAN is the number 1 brand in the laundry pre wash additives market in the U.S. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER Power Gel Laundry Detergent and ARM & HAMMER plus OXICLEAN liquid and powder laundry detergents, combining the benefits of these 2 powerful laundry detergent products. In 2011 the Company launched the only scented liquid detergent clinically tested safe for sensitive skin under the ARM & HAMMER name. The Company recently introduced ARM & HAMMER CRYSTAL BURST power packs, a new convenient unit dose form of laundry detergent. The Company laundry products also include fabric softener sheets that prevent static cling and soften and freshen clothes. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER FRESH N SOFT liquid fabric softener and offers another liquid fabric softener, NICE N FLUFFY, at a slightly lower price enabling the Company to compete at several price points. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER Total 2 in 1 Dryer Cloths, a fabric softener sheet used in the clothes dryer that delivers liquid like softening, freshening and static control. The Company also markets a line of cat litter products, including ARM & HAMMER Super Scoop clumping cat litter. Line extensions of Super Scoop include ARM & HAMMER Multi Cat cat litter, designed for households with more than 1 cat, ARM & HAMMER Odor Alert cat litter, with crystals that change color 4 Table of Contents when activated, ARM & HAMMER Essentials clumping cat litter, a corn based scoopable litter made for consumers who prefer to use products made from natural ingredients, and ARM & HAMMER Double Duty cat litter, which eliminates both urine and feces odors on contact. FELINE PINE cat litter, which was acquired in December 2010, continues to be the number 1 brand in the natural litter segment, which is the highest growth segment in the litter category. This brand complements the Company existing cat litter business and positions the Company as the leading supplier of natural cat litter. In 2012, the Company will launch ARM & HAMMER Ultra Last, a longer lasting clumping cat litter. In addition, the Company markets a line of household cleaning products including CLEAN SHOWER daily shower cleaner, SCRUB FREE bathroom cleaners and SNO BOL toilet bowl cleaner. The Company also markets KABOOM bathroom cleaner and ORANGE GLO household cleaning products. In 2012, the Company will launch OXICLEAN Dishwasher Booster, which removes cloudy film and food particles on glasses and dishes. Personal Care Products The Company participates in the personal care business using the unique strengths of its ARM & HAMMER trademark and baking soda technology, and has expanded its presence through its acquisition of antiperspirants, oral care products, depilatories, reproductive health products, oral analgesics and nasal saline moisturizers under a variety of other leading brand names. In 2011, Personal Care Products constituted approximately 35% of the Company Consumer Domestic sales and approximately 25% of the Company total sales. ARM & HAMMER Baking Soda, when used as a dentifrice, whitens and polishes teeth, removes plaque and leaves the mouth feeling fresh and clean. These properties led to the development of a complete line of sodium bicarbonate based dentifrice products which are marketed and sold nationally primarily under the ARM & HAMMER DENTAL CARE brand name. In 2012, the Company plans to launch a line of toothpaste for sensitive teeth under the combined ARM & HAMMER and ORAJEL names. The Company also manufactures in the United States and markets in the United States (including Puerto Rico) and Canada, CLOSE UP, PEPSODENT and AIM toothpastes, which are priced at a discount from the market leaders, and the MENTADENT brand of toothpaste and toothbrushes. The Company markets ORAJEL oral analgesics, which includes products for adults as well as Baby ORAJEL Cooling Cucumber Teething Gel and Baby ORAJEL Tooth and Gum Cleanser. The Company markets SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes in the United States (including Puerto Rico), the United Kingdom, Canada, China and Australia. In 2011, the SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrush was the number 1 brand of battery operated toothbrushes in the United States. The Company also markets SPINBRUSH Pro Select toothbrushes, a 2 speed version of the product, SPINBRUSH Pro Recharge, a rechargeable toothbrush offering up to 1 week of power brushes between charges and SPINBRUSH Sonic, a reasonably priced high speed battery operated toothbrush which competes with much more expensive sonic toothbrushes. In 2012, the Company will launch ARM & HAMMER Tooth Tunes battery operated toothbrushes, a toothbrush with proprietary technology which delivers music while brushing. The Company deodorant and antiperspirant products are marketed under the ARM & HAMMER, ARRID and LADY S CHOICE brand names. Condoms are recognized as highly reliable contraceptives as well as an effective means of reducing the risk of sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ). The Company TROJAN condom brand has been in use for more than 90 years. In 2011, the brand continued its market and innovation leadership in the United States with the new ECSTASY product line and continued success of such products as EXTENDED PLEASURE, HER PLEASURE, TWISTED PLEASURE, SHARED PLEASURE, MAGNUM WITH WARM SENSATIONS, a 5 Table of Contents unique lubricant system which warms the skin on contact for enhanced pleasure, TROJAN Ultra Thin condoms and TROJAN Fire and Ice Condoms. The Company also markets a series of vibrating products under the TROJAN name. In 2012, the Company will launch TROJAN Vibrations Midnight Collection, a new line of vibrating products. In 2011, the Company FIRST RESPONSE brand continued to be number 1 in the home pregnancy and ovulation test kit business category. The Company also markets ANSWER, which competes in the value segment of the home pregnancy and ovulation test kit market. The Company also markets a home female fertility test under the FIRST RESPONSE brand name. The Company NAIR depilatory brand is the number 1 depilatory brand in the United States, with innovative products that address consumer needs for quick, complete and longer lasting hair removal. The Company offers a full array of depilatory products for women, men and teens under the NAIR brand name. In 2011 and 2012, new NAIR variants were launched. These include Cool Gel, Roll On Milk and H1y, and Brazilian Spa Clay products. The Company markets the SIMPLY SALINE brand of nasal saline moisturizers, complementing the Company existing STERIMAR brand nasal saline solution business in Europe and other parts of the world. Consumer International The Consumer International segment markets a variety of personal care products, household and over the counter products in international markets, including Canada, France, Australia, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Brazil and China. Total Consumer International net sales represented approximately 19% of the Company consolidated net sales in 2011 Net sales of the subsidiaries located in Canada, France, the United Kingdom and Australia accounted for 36%, 17%, 17% and 12%, respectively, of the Company 2011 international net sales in this segment. No other country in which the Company operates accounts for more than 10% of its total international net sales in this segment, and no product line accounts for more than 10% of total international net sales. Certain of the Company international product lines are similar to its domestic product lines. The Company markets depilatories and waxes, home pregnancy and ovulation test kits and oral care products in most of its international markets. For example, the Company markets waxes and depilatory products in virtually all international locations, and TROJAN condoms in Canada and Mexico. The Company has expanded distribution of ARM & HAMMER products internationally by marketing ARM & HAMMER laundry and pet care products in Canada and ARM & HAMMER laundry care products in Mexico. The Company also markets SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes, primarily in the United Kingdom, Canada, France, China and Australia, and OXICLEAN, KABOOM and ORANGE GLO products primarily in Mexico and Canada. The Company sells PEARL DROPS products in Europe, Canada and Australia, STERIMAR nasal hygiene products in a number of markets in Europe, Latin America, China and Australia, and BATISTE dry shampoo principally in the United Kingdom. COMPETITION FOR CONSUMER DOMESTIC AND CONSUMER INTERNATIONAL The Company competes in the household and personal care consumer products categories using the strengths of its trademarks and technologies. These are highly innovative categories, characterized by a continuous flow of new products and line extensions, and requiring significant advertising and promotion, in which we compete primarily on the basis of quality, innovation and price. Consumer products, particularly those 6 Table of Contents that are valued priced, such as laundry and household cleaning products, as well as certain toothpaste products, are subject to significant price competition. As a result, the Company from time to time may need to reduce the prices for some of its products to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. Internationally, the Company products compete in similar competitive categories for most of its products. Many of the Company competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, Sun Products Corporation, The Clorox Company, Colgate Palmolive Company, S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., Henkel AG & Co. KGaA, Reckitt Benckiser Group plc, Johnson & Johnson, Ansell Limited, and Inverness Medical Innovations, Inc. Many of these companies have greater financial resources than the Company and have the capacity to outspend the Company if they attempt to gain market share. Product introductions typically involve heavy marketing costs in the year of launch, and the Company usually is not able to determine whether the new products and line extensions will be successful until a period of time has elapsed following the introduction of the new products or the extension of the product line. Because of the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from customers, particularly high volume retail store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. These concessions or terms could reduce the Company margins. Furthermore, if the Company is unable to maintain price or trade terms acceptable to its trade customers, the customers could increase product purchases from competitors and reduce purchases from the Company, which would harm the Company sales and profitability. DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER DOMESTIC Products in the Consumer Domestic segment are marketed throughout the United States primarily through a broad distribution platform that includes supermarkets, mass merchandisers, wholesale clubs, drugstores, convenience stores, pet specialty stores and dollar stores. The Company employs a sales force based regionally throughout the United States, that utilizes the services of independent food brokers, who represent our products in the Food, Pet, Dollar and Club classes of trade. The Company products are stored in Company plants and third party owned warehouses and are either delivered by independent trucking companies or picked up by customers. DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER INTERNATIONAL The Company Consumer International distribution ne2rk reflects capacity and cost considerations in the regions served. In Canada, Mexico and Australia, finished goods are warehoused internally and shipped directly to customers through independent freight carriers. In the United Kingdom, domestic product distribution is subcontracted to professional distribution companies, while export product distribution is handled internally and shipped from the Company warehouses. In France, distribution of consumer products to mass markets is handled internally while distribution of the Company over the counter products to pharmacies and professional diagnostics to laboratories is handled by outside agencies. In Brazil and China, all product distribution is subcontracted to professional distribution companies. 7 Table of Contents Specialty Products (SPD) Principal Products The Company SPD segment focuses on sales to businesses and participates in 3 product areas Specialty Chemicals, Animal Nutrition and Specialty Cleaners. The following table sets forth the principal products of the Company SPD segment. Type of Product Key Brand Names Specialty Chemicals ARM & HAMMER Performance Grade Sodium Bicarbonate ARMAND PRODUCTS Potassium Carbonate and Potassium Bicarbonate (1) Animal Nutrition ARM & HAMMER Feed Grade Sodium Bicarbonate MEGALAC Rumen Bypass Fat SQ 810 Natural Sodium Sesquicarbonate BIO CHLOR and FERMENTEN Rumen Fermentation Enhancers DCAD Plus Feed Grade Potassium Carbonate (2) MEGALAC R, Omega 3 & Omega 6 Essential Fatty Acids MEGAMINE L, Rumen Bypass Lysine Specialty Cleaners Commercial & Professional Cleaners and Deodorizers ARMAKLEEN Aqueous Cleaners (3) ARMEX Blast Media (3) (1) Manufactured and marketed by Armand Products Company, an entity in which the Company holds a 50% joint venture interest. (2) Manufactured for the Company by Armand Products Company. (3) Distributed in North America by The ArmaKleen Company, an entity in which the Company holds a 50% joint venture interest. Specialty Chemicals The Company specialty chemicals business primarily encompasses the manufacture, marketing and sale of sodium bicarbonate in a range of grades and granulations for use in industrial markets. In industrial markets, sodium bicarbonate is used by other manufacturing companies as a leavening agent for commercial baked goods, as an antacid in pharmaceuticals, as a carbon dioxide release agent in fire extinguishers, as an alkaline agent in swimming pool chemicals, and as a buffer in kidney dialysis. The Company 99.2% owned Brazilian subsidiary, Quimica Geral do Nordeste ( QGN ), is South America leading provider of sodium bicarbonate. The business, which has annual revenues of approximately $40 million, markets sodium bicarbonate, dairy products and other chemicals in Brazil. The Company and Occidental Petroleum Corporation are equal partners in a joint venture, Armand Products Company, which manufactures and markets potassium carbonate and potassium bicarbonate for sale in domestic and international markets. The potassium based products are used in a wide variety of applications, including agricultural products, specialty glass and ceramics, and potassium silicates. Armand Products also manufactures for the Company a potassium carbonate based animal feed additive for sale in the dairy industry, described below under Animal Nutrition Products. On September 22, 2011, the Company, together with FMC Corporation and TATA Chemicals, formed an operating joint venture, Natronx Technologies LLC ( Natronx ). The Company has a 1 third ownership interest in Natronx, and its investment is accounted for under the equity method. The joint venture will engage in the manufacturing and marketing of sodium based, dry sorbents for air pollution control in electric utility and industrial boiler operations. The sorbents, primarily sodium bicarbonate and trona, are used by coal fired utilities 8 Table of Contents to remove harmful pollutants, such as acid gases, in flue gas treatment processes. Natronx intends to invest approximately $60 million to construct a 450,000 ton per year facility in Wyoming to produce trona sorbents by the fourth quarter of 2012, the cost of which will be equally shared among all members. The joint venture started business in the fourth quarter of 2011 and the Company made an initial investment of approximately $3 million and is committed to investing upwards of an additional $17 million in 2012 Animal Nutrition Products A special grade of sodium bicarbonate, as well as sodium sesquicarbonate, is sold to the animal feed market as a feed additive for use by the dairy industry as a buffer, or antacid, for dairy cattle. The Company also markets DCAD Plus feed grade potassium carbonate, which is manufactured by the Armand Products Company as a feed additive into the animal feed market. The Company markets MEGALAC rumen bypass fat, a nutritional supplement made from natural oils, which enables cows to maintain energy levels during the period of high milk production, resulting in improved milk yields and minimized weight loss. The product and the trademark MEGALAC are licensed under a long term license agreement from a British company, Volac Ltd. The Company also markets BIO CHLOR and FERMENTEN, a range of specialty feed ingredients for dairy cows, which improve rumen feed efficiency and help increase milk production. Specialty Cleaners The Company also provides a line of cleaning and deodorizing products for use in commercial and industrial applications such as office buildings, hotels, restaurants and other facilities. The Company and Safety Kleen Corporation are equal partners in a joint venture, The ArmaKleen Company, which was formed to build a specialty cleaning products business based on the Company technology and Safety Kleen sales and distribution organization. In North America, this joint venture distributes the Company proprietary product line of aqueous cleaners along with the Company ARMEX blast media line, which is designed for the removal of a wide variety of surface coatings. The Company continues to pursue opportunities to build this industrial cleaning business using the Company aqueous based technology as well as the ARMEX blast media line of products. COMPETITION FOR SPD Competition within the specialty chemicals and animal nutrition product lines is intense. The specialty chemicals business operates in a competitive environment influenced by capacity utilization, customers leverage and the impact of raw material and energy costs. Product introductions typically involve introductory costs in the year of launch, and the Company usually is not able to determine whether new products and line extensions will be successful until sometime following the introduction of new products or the extension of the product lines. DISTRIBUTION FOR SPD SPD markets sodium bicarbonate and other chemicals to industrial and agricultural customers primarily throughout the United States and Canada. Distribution is accomplished through a dedicated sales force supplemented by manufacturer representatives and the sales personnel of independent distributors throughout the country. The Company products in this segment are located in Company plants and public warehouses and are either delivered by independent trucking companies or picked up by customers at the Company facilities. 9 Table of Contents RAW MATERIALS AND SOURCES OF SUPPLY The Company manufactures sodium bicarbonate for both its consumer and specialty products businesses at its plants located at Green River, Wyoming and Old Fort, Ohio. The primary source of soda ash, a basic raw material used by the Company in the production of sodium bicarbonate, is the mineral trona, which is found in abundance in southwestern Wyoming near the Company Green River plant. The Company has adequate trona reserves under mineral leases to support the Company sodium bicarbonate requirements for the foreseeable future. The Company is party to a partnership agreement with General Chemical Corporation, which mines and processes trona reserves in Wyoming. Through the partnership and related supply and services agreements, the Company fulfills a substantial amount of its soda ash requirements, enabling the Company to achieve some of the economies of an integrated business capable of producing sodium bicarbonate and related products from the basic raw material. The Company also has an agreement for the supply of soda ash from another company. The partnership agreement and other supply agreements between the Company and General Chemical are terminable upon 2 years notice by either company. The Company believes that sufficient alternative sources of supply are available. The Company believes that ample sources of raw materials are available for all of its other major products. Detergent chemicals are used in a variety of the Company products and are available from a number of sources. Bottles, paper products and clay are available from multiple suppliers, although the Company chooses to source most of these materials from single sources under long term supply agreements in order to gain favorable pricing. The Company also uses a palm oil fraction in its rumen bypass fats products. Alternative sources of supply are available in case of disruption or termination of the supply agreements. The trend of higher raw material costs continued into 2011 As a result, the cost of surfactants, diesel fuel, palm fatty acid distillate (PFAD), latex, corrugated paper and oil based raw and packaging materials used in the household and specialty products businesses were all higher in 2011 than 2010. Additional increases in the prices of certain raw materials could materially impact the Company costs and financial results if the Company is unable to pass such costs along in the form of price increases to its customers. The Company utilizes the services of third party contract manufacturers around the world for certain products. PATENTS AND TRADEMARKS The Company trademarks (identified throughout this report in capitalized letters), including ARM & HAMMER, are registered with the United States Patent and Trademark Office and also with the trademark offices of many foreign countries. The ARM & HAMMER trademark has been used by the Company since 1867, and is a valuable asset and important to the successful operation of the Company business. The Company other valuable trademarks include TROJAN, NAIR, ORAJEL, FIRST RESPONSE, XTRA, OXICLEAN, SPINBRUSH, BATISTE, SIMPLY SALINE and FELINE PINE. The Company portfolio of trademarks represents substantial goodwill in the businesses using the trademarks. United States patents are currently granted for a term of 20 years from the date the patent application is filed. Although the Company actively seeks and maintains a number of patents, no single patent is considered significant to the business as a whole. CUSTOMERS AND ORDER BACKLOG In each of the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009, net sales to the Company largest customer, Wal Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates were 23%, 23% and 22% respectively, of the Company total consolidated net sales. The time between receipt of orders and shipment is generally short, and as a result, backlog is not significant. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of consolidated net sales in the 3 year period. 10 Table of Contents RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT The Company conducts research and development activities primarily at its Princeton and Cranbury facilities in New Jersey. The Company devotes significant resources and attention to product development, process technology and basic research to develop differentiated products with new and distinctive features and to provide increased convenience and value to its customers. To increase its innovative capabilities, the Company engages outside contractors for general research and development in activities beyond its core areas of expertise. The Company spent $55.1 million, $537 million and $55.1 million on research and development activities in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. GOVERNMENT REGULATION General Some of the Company products are subject to regulation by 1 or more United States agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ), the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ), the Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ), and foreign agencies. FDA regulations govern a variety of matters relating to our products, such as product development, manufacturing, premarket clearance or approval, advertising and distribution. The regulations adopted and standards imposed by the FDA and similar foreign agencies evolve over time and can require the Company to make changes in its manufacturing processes and quality systems to remain in compliance. These agencies periodically inspect manufacturing and other facilities. If we fail to comply with applicable regulations and standards, we may be subject to sanctions, including fines and penalties, the recall of products and cessation of manufacturing and or distribution. In addition, the Company sells products that are subject to regulation under the Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act, which are administered by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ). The Company also is subject to regulation by the FTC in connection with the content of its labeling, advertising, promotion, trade practices and other matters. The Company relationship with certain union employees may be overseen by the National Labor Relations Board. The Company activities also are regulated by various agencies of the states, localities and foreign countries in which the Company sells its products. Medical Device Clearance and Approval To be commercially distributed in the U.S., a medical device must, unless exempt, receive clearance or approval from the FDA pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act ( FDCA ). Lower risk devices are categorized as either class I or II devices, for which the manufacturer must generally submit a premarket notification requesting permission for commercial distribution known as 510(k) clearance. Our condoms, home pregnancy and ovulation test kits are generally regulated as class II devices. Some low risk devices, including our SPINBRUSH battery powered toothbrushes, are in class I and exempted from a 510(k) requirement. To obtain 510(k) clearance, a device must be substantially equivalent in intended use and in safety and effectiveness to a previously 510(k) cleared device. Any modification to a 510(k) cleared device that could significantly affect its safety or effectiveness, or that would constitute a major change in its intended use, generally requires a new clearance or approval. A manufacturer may determine that a new 510(k) clearance is not required, but if the FDA disagrees, it may retroactively require a 510(k) clearance and may require the manufacturer to cease marketing or recall the modified device until 510(k) clearance is obtained. For example, the FDA recently required the Company to submit 3 510(k) notifications for modifications to its condom products, where the FDA believed that the Company should have filed a 510(k) prior to making the modifications. The Company submitted these 510(k) notifications in January 2012 To date, the FDA has not required the Company to cease marketing the modified products during the pendency of the 510(k) submissions. 11 Table of Contents Medical Device Postmarket Regulation After a medical device is commercialized, numerous regulatory requirements apply, including the quality system regulation, which imposes current good manufacturing practice requirements governing the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the design, manufacture, packaging, servicing, labeling, storage, installation, and distribution of all finished medical devices intended for human use; labeling regulations prohibiting product promotion for unapproved or off label uses; the medical device reporting regulation requiring a manufacturer to report to the FDA if its device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury or malfuncti1d in a way that would likely cause or contribute to a death or serious injury if it were to recur; and the reports of corrections and removals regulation, which requires a manufacturer to report recalls and field actions to the FDA if initiated to reduce a risk to health posed by the device or to remedy a violation of the FDCA. OTC Pharmaceutical The Company has over the counter (OTC) pharmaceutical products, such as our toothpaste, antiperspirant, and oral analgesics products, that are also subject to FDA and foreign regulation. Under the FDA OTC Monograph System, the FDA issues regulations, known as monographs, that specify the active ingredients and permitted indications, allowable combinations of ingredients and dosage levels and required warnings and precautions. In addition, all of the Company facilities in the pharmaceutical production and distribution chain must comply with FDA good manufacturing practices regulations and are subject to the FDA periodic audits. For information regarding recent FDA actions pertaining to the Company, see Risk Factors Failure by us or certain of our suppliers to comply with various regulations in the countries which we operate could expose us to enforcement actions or other adverse consequences, in Item 1A of this report. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS The Company operations are subject to federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws, rules and regulations relating to environmental and health and safety concerns including air emissions, wastewater discharges, and solid and hazardous waste management activities. The Company endeavors to take actions necessary to comply with such regulations. These steps include periodic environmental audits of each Company facility. The audits, conducted by independent engineering firms with expertise in environmental compliance, include site visits at each location, as well as a review of documentary information, to determine compliance with such federal, state, local and foreign laws, rules and regulations. Other than as described under Item 3, Legal Proceedings, in this report, the Company believes that it is in material compliance with existing environmental regulations. See Item 3, Legal Proceedings in this report for information regarding an environmental proceeding relating to the Company Brazilian subsidiary. GEOGRAPHIC AREAS Approximately 79%, 79% and 81% of the Company net sales in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, were to customers in the United States. Approximately 96%, 96% and 95% of the Company long lived assets were located in the United States at December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Other than the United States, no 1 country accounts for more than 7% of consolidated net sales and 3% of total assets. 12 Table of Contents EMPLOYEES At December 31, 2011, the Company had approximately 3,500 employees. The Company is party to a labor contract with the International Machinists Union at its Colonial Heights, Virginia plant, which expires May 31, 2013 Internationally, the Company employs union employees in France, Mexico, Brazil and New Zealand. The Company believes that its relations with both its union and non union employees are satisfactory. CLASSES OF SIMILAR PRODUCTS The Company operations, exclusive of unconsolidated entities, constitute 3 reportable segments, Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products (SPD). The table set forth below shows the percentage of the Company net sales contributed by each group of similar products marketed by the Company during 2011, 2010 and 2009. % of Net Sales (In millions) 2011 2010 2009 Consumer Domestic Household Products 47 % 47 % 47 % Personal Care Products 25 % 26 % 27 % Consumer International 19 % 17 % 16 % Specialty Products 9 % 10 % 10 % The table above reflects consolidated net sales, exclusive of net sales of unconsolidated entities. PUBLIC INFORMATION The Company maintains a web site at www.churchdwight.com and on the Investors SEC Filings page of the web site makes available free of charge the Company annual reports on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q, current reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after the Company electronically files these materials with, or furnishes them to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. Also available on the Investors Corporate Governance page on the Company website are the Company Corporate Governance Guidelines, charters for the Audit, Compensation & Organization and Governance & Nominating Committees of the Company Board of Directors and the Company Code of Conduct. Each of the foregoing is also available in print free of charge and may be obtained upon written request to Church & Dwight Co., Inc., 469 North Harrison Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08543, attention Secretary. The information presented in the Company web site is not a part of this report and the reference to the Company web site is intended to be an inactive textual reference only. 13 Table of Contents ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS The following risks and uncertainties, as well as others described elsewhere in this report, could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition Economic conditions could adversely affect our business. Uncertainty about current global economic conditions has adversely affected demand for some of our products. Factors that can affect demand include rates of unemployment, consumer confidence, health care costs, fuel and other energy costs and other economic factors affecting consumer spending behavior. While the Company products generally are consumer staples that should be less vulnerable to decreases in discretionary spending than other products, they may become subject to increasing price competition as recessionary conditions continue. Moreover, some of our products, such as laundry additives and battery operated toothbrushes, are more likely to be affected by consumer decisions to control spending. Some of our customers, including mass merchandisers, supermarkets, drugstores, convenience stores, wholesale clubs, pet specialty stores and dollar stores have experienced declining financial performance, which could affect their ability to pay amounts due to us on a timely basis or at all. In response, we regularly conduct a review of the financial strength of our key customers. As appropriate, we modify customer credit limits, which may have an adverse impact on future sales. Because the same economic conditions are impacting many of our suppliers, we also regularly conduct a similar review of our suppliers to assess both their financial viability and the importance of their products to our operations. Where appropriate, we intend to identify alternate sources of materials and services. To date, we have not experienced a material adverse impact from economic conditions affecting our customers or suppliers. However, a continued economic decline that adversely affects our suppliers and customers could adversely affect our operations and sales. In recent years, the banking system and financial markets have experienced severe disruption, including, among other things, bank failures and consolidations, severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, rating downgrades, declines in asset valuations, and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. These conditions present the following risks to us, among others We are dependent on the continued financial viability of the financial institutions that participate in the syndicate that is generally obligated to fund our Credit Agreement. In addition, the Credit Agreement includes a commitment increase feature that enables us to increase the size of the revolving credit facility, subject to lending commitments and certain conditions. Any disruption in the credit markets could limit the availability of credit or the ability or willingness of financial institutions to extend credit, which could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. If any financial institutions that are parties to the Credit Agreement are unable to honor their funding commitments, the cash availability under our Credit Agreement and Commercial Paper program may be curtailed. Downgrades in our credit ratings and other effects of volatile economic conditions on the credit market could reduce our liquidity or increase our borrowing costs and liquidity. Our short and long term credit ratings affect our borrowing costs and access to financing. A downgrade in our credit ratings would increase our borrowing costs and could affect our ability to issue commercial paper. Disruptions in the commercial paper market or other effects of volatile economic conditions on the credit market also could raise our borrowing costs for both short and long term debt offerings. Either scenario could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. We have not been notified of any circumstances that would prevent any participating financial institution from funding our Credit Agreement. However, under current or future circumstances, such constraints may exist. Although we believe that our operating cash flows, together with our access to the credit markets, provide us with significant discretionary funding capacity, the inability of 1 or more institutions to fulfill their funding obligations under the Credit Agreement could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and operations. 14 Table of Contents If our customers discontinue or reduce distribution of our products or increase private label products, our sales may decline, adversely affecting our financial performance. The economic crisis caused many of our customers to more critically analyze the number of brands they sell which has resulted in their reduction or discontinuance of certain of our product lines, particularly those products that are not number 1 or 2 in their category. If this occurs and we are unable to improve distribution for those products at other customers, our Company results could be adversely affected. In addition, many of our customers sell products under their own private label brands that compete with products that we sell. As consumers look for opportunities to decrease discretionary spending, our customers have discontinued or reduced distribution of some of our products to encourage those consumers to purchase our customers less expensive private label products. To the extent some of our products are discontinued or are adversely affected by our trade customers actions to increase shelf space for their private label products, we are focusing our efforts on improving distribution with other customers. Our results could be adversely affected if our efforts are not effective. If the reputation of 1 or more of our leading brands erodes our financial results could suffer. Our financial success is directly dependent on the success of our brands, particularly the ARM & HAMMER, OXICLEAN and TROJAN brands. The success of these brands can suffer if our marketing plans or product initiatives do not have the desired impact on a brand image or its ability to attract consumers. Further, our results could be adversely affected if 1 of our leading brands suffers damage to its reputation due to real or perceived quality issues. We continue to develop and commercialize new products and product line extensions, but if they do not gain widespread customer acceptance or if they cause sales of our existing products to decline, our financial performance could decline. We strive to introduce new products that are based on current and new technology. The development and introduction of new products involves substantial research, development, marketing and promotional expenditures, which we may be unable to recover if the new products do not gain widespread market acceptance. In addition, if sales generated by new products result in a concomitant decline in sales of our existing products, our financial performance could be harmed. We may discontinue products or product lines which could result in returns, asset write offs and shutdown costs. We also may engage in product recalls that would reduce our cash flow and earnings and could be detrimental to the brand reputation. From time to time, we have discontinued certain products and product lines, which resulted in returns from customers, asset write offs and shutdown costs. We may suffer similar adverse consequences in the future to the extent we discontinue products that do not meet expectations or no longer satisfy consumer demand. Moreover, product quality defects or safety concerns could result in product recalls. Product returns or recalls, write offs or shutdown costs would reduce sales, cash flow and earnings and damage the product brand reputation. We face intense competition in a mature industry and we may be required to increase expenditures and accept lower profit margins to preserve or maintain our market share. Unless the markets in which we compete grow substantially, a loss of market share will result in reduced sales levels and declining operating results. During 2011, approximately 79% of our sales were generated in U.S. markets. U.S. markets for consumer products are considered mature and commonly characterized by high household penetration, particularly with respect to our most significant product categories, such as laundry detergents, deodorizers, household cleaning products, toothpastes, antiperspirants and deodorants. Our unit sales growth in domestic markets will depend on increased use of our products by consumers, product innovation and our ability to capture market share from competitors. We may not succeed in implementing strategies to increase domestic revenues. 15 Table of Contents The consumer products industry, particularly the laundry detergent, personal care and air deodorizer categories, is intensely competitive. To protect existing market share or to capture increased market share, we may need to increase expenditures for promotion and advertising and to introduce and establish new products. Increased expenditures may not prove successful in maintaining or enhancing market share and could result in lower sales and profits. Many of our competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, Sun Products Corporation, The Clorox Company, Colgate Palmolive Company, Henkel AG & Co. KGaA, Reckitt Benckiser Group plc, Johnson & Johnson, Inverness Medical Innovations, Inc. and S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc. Many of these companies have greater financial resources than we do, and, therefore, have the capacity to outspend us should they attempt to gain market share. If we lose market share and the markets in which we compete do not grow substantially, our sales levels and operating results will decline. Providing price concessions or trade terms that are acceptable to our customers, or the failure to do so, could adversely affect our sales and profitability. Consumer products, particularly those that are value priced like many of our products, are subject to significant price competition. As a result, we may need to reduce the prices for some of our products, or increase prices by an amount that does not cover manufacturing cost increases, to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. Any reduction in prices, or inability to raise prices sufficiently to cover manufacturing cost increases, in response to these pressures would harm profit margins. In addition, if our sales volumes fail to grow sufficiently to offset any reduction in margins, our results of operations would suffer. Because of the competitive environment facing many of our customers, particularly our high volume retail store customers, have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. To the extent we provide concessions or better trade terms, our margins are reduced. Further, if we are unable to maintain terms that are acceptable to our trade customers, these trade customers could reduce purchases of our products and increase purchases of products from our competitors, which would harm our sales and profitability. Reductions in inventory by our trade customers, including as a result of consolidations in the retail industry, could adversely affect orders for our products in periods during which the reduction occurs. From time to time our retail customers may reduce inventory levels in managing their working capital requirements. Any reduction in inventory levels by our retail customers will result in reduced orders and harm our operating results for the financial periods affected by the reductions. In particular, continued consolidation within the retail industry could potentially reduce inventory levels maintained by our retail customers, which could result in reduced orders and adversely affect our results of operations for the financial periods affected by the reductions. A continued shift in the retail market from food and drug stores to club stores and mass merchandisers could cause our sales to decline. Our performance also depends upon the general health of the economy and of the retail environment in particular and could be significantly harmed by changes affecting retailing and by the financial difficulties of retailers. Consumer products such as those marketed by us are increasingly being sold by club stores and mass merchandisers, while sales of consumer products by food and drug stores comprise a smaller proportion of the total volume of consumer products sold. Sales of our products are stronger in the food and drug channels of trade and not as strong in club stores and mass merchandiser channels. Although we have taken steps to improve sales to club stores and mass merchandisers, if we are not successful in further improving sales to these channels, and the current trend continues, our financial condition and operating results could suffer. Loss of any of our principal customers could significantly decrease our sales and profitability. Wal Mart, together with its affiliates, is our largest customer, accounting for approximately 23% of net sales in 2011, 23% of net sales in 2010 and 22% of net sales in 2009. Our top 3 customers accounted for 16 Table of Contents approximately 33% of net sales in 2011, 33% of net sales in 2010 and 32% of net sales in 2009. The loss of or a substantial decrease in the volume of purchases by Wal Mart and its affiliates or any of our other largest customers would harm our sales and profitability. Failure to repay our indebtedness could adversely affect our financial condition and ability to operate our businesses. As of December 31, 2011, we had $2523 million of total consolidated indebtedness. Our failure to service our indebtedness or obtain additional financing as needed could have a material adverse effect on our business operating results and financial condition. We may make acquisitions that result in dilution to our current stockholders or increase our indebtedness, or both. In addition, acquisitions that are not properly integrated or are otherwise unsuccessful could strain or divert our resources. We have made several acquisitions in recent years, including businesses previously operated by Del Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Orange Glo International, Inc., the SIMPLY SALINE nasal moisturizer product line, the FELINE PINE natural cat litter product line and the BATISTE dry shampoo product line. We may make additional acquisitions or substantial investments in complementary businesses or products in the future. Any future acquisitions or investments would entail various risks, including the difficulty of integrating the operations and personnel of the acquired businesses or products, the potential disruption of our ongoing business and, generally, our potential inability to obtain the desired financial and strategic benefits from the acquisition or investment. The risks associated with assimilation are increased to the extent we acquire businesses that have stand al1 operations that cannot easily be integrated or operations or sources of supply outside of the United States and Canada, for which products are manufactured locally by third parties. These factors could harm our financial condition and operating results. Any future acquisitions or investments could result in substantial cash expenditures, the issuance of new equity by us or the incurrence of additional debt and contingent liabilities. In addition, any potential acquisitions or investments, whether or not ultimately completed, could divert the attention of management and divert other resources from other matters that are critical to our operations. Our condom product line could suffer if the spermicide N 9 is proved or perceived to be harmful. Our distribution of condoms under the TROJAN and other trademarks is regulated by the FDA. Certain of our condoms, and similar condoms sold by our competitors, contain the spermicide nonoxynol 9 ( N 9 ). Some interested groups have issued reports that N 9 should not be used rectally or for multiple daily acts of vaginal intercourse. In late 2008, the FDA issued final labeling guidance for latex condoms but excluded N 9 lubricated condoms from the guidance. While we await further FDA guidance on N 9 lubricated condoms we believe that our present labeling for condoms with N 9 is compliant with the overall objectives of the FDA guidance, and that condoms with N 9 will remain a viable contraceptive choice for those couples who wish to use them. However, we cannot predict the nature of the labeling that ultimately will be required by the FDA. If the FDA or state governments eventually promulgate rules that prohibit or restrict the use of N 9 in condoms (such as new labeling requirements), we could incur costs from obsolete products, packaging or raw materials, and sales of condoms could decline, which, in turn, could decrease our earnings. Our operations and the operations of our third party manufacturers and suppliers may be subject to disruption from events beyond our or their control. Our operations, as well as the operations of our third party manufacturers and significant suppliers may be subject to disruption from a variety of causes, including work stoppages, financial difficulties, acts of war, terrorism, pandemics, fire, earthquake, flooding or other natural disasters. If a major disruption were to occur at our operations, it could result in harm to people or the natural environment, delays in shipments of products to customers or suspension of operations, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. 17 Table of Contents Similar consequences may result with regard to disruptions in the operations of our third party manufacturers or suppliers, some of which could have a material adverse effect upon our business. Price increases in raw and packaging materials or energy costs could erode our profit margins, which could harm operating results, and efforts to hedge against raw material price increases may adversely affect our operating results if raw material prices decline. Increases in the prices of raw materials such as surfactants, which are cleaning agents, palm oil, paper products and bottles, or increases in energy costs, could significantly affect our profit margins. In particular, during the past few years, we have experienced extraordinary price increases for raw and packaging materials, diesel fuel and energy. Concerns about the adequacy of oil supply, in the face of increasing demand, continued to affect pricing. We use surfactants and bottles in the manufacture and marketing of laundry and household cleaning products. We use paper products for packaging in many of our consumer and specialty chemical products. We use palm oil in certain of our animal nutrition products. We have attempted to address these price increases through cost reduction programs and price increases of our own products, entering into pre buying arrangements with certain suppliers and entering into hedge agreements for diesel fuel costs. If raw material price increases continue, we may not be able to fully offset them. This could harm our financial condition and operating results. We use hedge agreements to mitigate the volatility of diesel fuel prices and related fuel surcharges. The hedge agreements are designed to add stability to our product costs, enabling us to make pricing decisions and lessen the economic impact of abrupt changes in diesel fuel prices over the term of the contract. However, in periods of declining fuel prices the hedge agreements can have the effect of increasing our expenditures for fuel. Failure by us or certain of our suppliers to comply with various regulations in the countries which we operate could expose us to enforcement actions or other adverse consequences. The manufacturing, processing, formulation, packaging, labeling, marketing and sale of our products are subject to regulation by federal agencies, including the FDA, the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) and the Consumer Product Safety Commission. In addition, our operations are subject to the oversight of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Labor Relations Board. Our activities are also regulated by various agencies of the states, localities and foreign countries in which our products are sold. In particular, the FDA regulates the safety, manufacturing, labeling and distribution of condoms, home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, battery operated toothbrushes and over the counter pharmaceuticals. The FDA also exercises oversight over cosmetic products such as depilatories. In addition, under a memorandum of understanding between the FDA and the FTC, the FTC has jurisdiction with regard to the promotion and advertising of these products, and the FTC regulates the promotion and advertising of our other products as well. As part of its regulatory authority, the FDA may periodically conduct inspections of the physical facilities, machinery, processes and procedures that we use to manufacture regulated products and may observe compliance issues that would require us to make certain changes in our manufacturing facilities and processes. The failure of a facility to be in compliance may lead to regulatory action against the products made in that facility, including seizure, injunction or recall, as well as to possible action against the manufacturer. We may be required to make additional expenditures to address these issues or possibly stop selling certain products until the compliance issue has been remediated. As a result, our business could be adversely affected. For example, the FDA issued a warning letter to us, dated May 16, 2011 ( Warning Letter ), following an inspection of our Princeton, New Jersey headquarters. The Warning Letter stated that our medical device reporting ( MDR ) procedure does not properly identify all required reportable events. The Warning Letter also criticized our proposals for addressing inadequacies previously identified by the FDA as to our complaint handling process. In response, we proposed several corrective actions that were accepted by the FDA, and are 18 Table of Contents engaged in further discussions with the FDA towards resolving the issue relating to our complaint handling process. In addition, partly in response to FDA stated concerns, we made product and labeling changes in 2011 and issued a December 2011 safety notice advising consumers about the proper use of SPINBRUSH toothbrushes to avoid injuries associated with improper use of the product. On February 13, 2012, at the conclusion of an inspection of our Princeton facility, FDA issued a Notice of Inspectional Observations (also known as a 483 report ), containing several observations, including a repeat of an issue identified in a previous 483 report and in the Warning Letter, namely a failure to properly identify all required reportable events. In addition, the 483 report addressed inadequacies in procedures and processes related to corrective and preventive actions, complaint handling, maintenance of a quality system record, and establishment of records of acceptable suppliers. We are preparing a response to the 483 report and intend to fully cooperate in resolving FDA regulatory concerns. On February 16, 2012, the FDA issued a safety communication warning consumers of serious injuries and potential hazards associated with the use of SPINBRUSH. We plan to cooperate with the FDA to address the matters raised in the safety communication warning. There is no assurance that the FDA will not take further enforcement action in connection with the foregoing matters, or that additional safety notices or recalls of our SPINBRUSH product will not be required. Either additional enforcement action, or additional safety notices or recalls, if they were to occur, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. Likewise, any future determination by the FDA or similar foreign agency that our products or quality systems do not comply with applicable regulations could result in future compliance activities, including product recalls, import detentions, injunctions preventing the shipment of products, or other enforcement actions (and associated adverse publicity) that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. Our international operations, including the production of over the counter drug products, are subject to regulation in each of the foreign jurisdictions in which we manufacture or market goods. Changes in product standards or manufacturing requirements in any of these jurisdictions could require us to make certain modifications to our operations or product formulations, or to cease manufacturing certain products completely. The effect of the regulatory environment in foreign countries on our over the counter and medical devices may affect our ability to market and to make competitive claims for our products. As a result, our international business could be adversely affected. We are subject to risks related to our international operations that could adversely affect our results of operations. Our international operations subject us to risks customarily associated with foreign operations, including currency fluctuations; import and export license requirements; trade restrictions; changes in tariffs and taxes; compliance with laws and regulations concerning ethical business practices, including without limitations, the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act; restrictions on repatriating foreign profits back to the United States; and difficulties in staffing and managing international operations. 19 Table of Contents In all foreign jurisdictions in which we operate, we are subject to laws and regulations that govern foreign investment, foreign trade and currency exchange transactions. These laws and regulations may limit our ability to repatriate cash as dividends or otherwise to the United States and may limit our ability to convert foreign currency cash flow into U.S. dollars. Outside the United States, sales and costs are denominated in a variety of currencies, including the Euro, British pound, Brazilian real, Canadian dollar, Mexican peso, Chinese yuan and Australian dollar. A weakening of the currencies in which sales are generated relative to the currencies in which costs are denominated would decrease operating profits and cash flow. Environmental matters create potential liability risks. We must comply with various environmental laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate, including those relating to the handling and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes and the remediation of contamination associated with the use and disposal of hazardous substances. A release of such substances due to accident or an intentional act could result in substantial liability to governmental authorities or to third parties. We have incurred, and will continue to incur, capital and operating expenditures and other costs in complying with environmental laws and regulations and we currently are subject to environmental regulatory proceedings involving our Brazilian subsidiary, which has been fined the equivalent of approximately $3 million in the proceedings. Our Brazilian subsidiary is contesting the fine. It is possible that we could become subject to additional environmental liabilities in the future, particularly with respect to our operation in Brazil that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. Product liability claims and recalls could adversely affect the Company sales and operating results and brand reputation. We are, from time to time, subject to product liability claims. We may be required to pay for losses or injuries actually or purportedly caused by our products. Claims could be based on allegations that, among other things, our products contain contaminants, provide inadequate instructions regarding their use, or inadequate warnings concerning interactions with other substances. Product liability claims and recalls also could result in negative publicity that could harm our sales and operating results and the reputation of our brands. In addition, if 1 of our products is found to be defective, we could be required to recall it, which could result in adverse publicity and significant expenses. Although we maintain product liability and product recall insurance coverage, potential product liability claims and recall costs may exceed the amount of insurance coverage or may be excluded under the terms of the policy, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. Failure to effectively utilize or successfully assert intellectual property rights could materially adversely affect our competitiveness. We rely on trademark, trade secret, patent and copyright laws to protect our intellectual property rights. We cannot be sure that these intellectual property rights will be effectively utilized or, if necessary, successfully asserted. There is a risk that we will not be able to obtain and perfect our own intellectual property rights, or, where appropriate, license from others intellectual property rights necessary to support new product introductions. We cannot be sure that these rights, if obtained, will not be invalidated, circumvented or challenged in the future. In addition, even if such rights are obtained in the United States, the laws of some of the other countries in which our products are or may be sold do not protect intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the United States. Our failure to perfect or successfully assert intellectual property rights could make us less competitive and could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. 20 Table of Contents We rely significantly on information technology. Any inadequacy, interruption, loss of data, integration failure or security failure of that technology could harm our ability to effectively operate our business and damage the reputation of our brands. We rely extensively on information technology systems, some of which are managed by third party service providers, to interact with internal personnel and customers and suppliers, and other persons. These interactions include, but are not limited to, ordering and managing materials from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping product to customers, processing transactions, summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, and other processes necessary to manage our business. Our systems could be damaged or cease to function properly due to any number of causes, including catastrophic events, power outages, and security breaches. Although we have business continuity plans in place to address service interruptions, if our business continuity plans do not provide effective alternative processes on a timely basis, we may suffer interruptions in our ability to manage operations which may adversely affect our business. In addition, we have recently completed information systems upgrades in the United States and Canada, which affect our ordering, shipping and billing systems in those countries and plan to institute similar upgrades in 2012 If the new system does not function properly, our ability to order supplies, process and deliver customer orders and process and receive payments for products sold in regions in which we conduct the substantial majority of our business could be limited, which could adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows. Any business interruptions or data security breaches, including cyber security breaches resulting in private data disclosure, could damage the Company reputation and could also adversely impact our results of operations and cash flow. Further, negative postings or comments about us on any social ne2rking web site could damage our reputation. Changes in our effective tax rate may adversely affect our earnings and cash flow. Our future effective tax rate could be affected by changes in tax laws and regulations or their interpretation, changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, or changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The realization of deferred income tax assets is assessed and a valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. If the actual amount of our future taxable income is less than the amount we are currently projecting with respect to specific tax jurisdictions, or if there is a change in the time period within which the deferred tax asset becomes deductible, we could be required to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. The recording of a valuation allowance would result in an increase in our effective tax rate, and would have an adverse effect on our operating results. In addition, changes in statutory tax rates may change our deferred tax assets or liability balances, which would have either a favorable or unfavorable impact on our effective tax rate. Resolutions of tax disputes may adversely affect our earnings and cash flow. Significant judgment is required in determining our effective tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We provide for uncertain tax positions with respect to tax positions that do not meet the recognition thresholds or measurement standards mandated by applicable accounting guidance. Changes to uncertain tax positions, including related interest and penalties, impact our effective tax rate. When particular tax matters arise, a number of years may elapse before such matters are audited and finally resolved. Favorable resolution of such matters could be recognized as a reduction to our effective tax rate in the year of resolution. Unfavorable resolution of any tax matter could increase the effective tax rate. Any resolution of a tax issue may require the use of cash in the year of resolution. There can be no guarantee that the Company will continue to make dividend payments or repurchase its stock. Although the Company Board of Directors has authorized a share repurchase program and recently increased the amount of its quarterly cash dividends payable on its Common Stock, any determinations by the 21 Table of Contents Company to continue to repurchase its Common Stock or by the Board of Directors to continue to pay cash dividends on its Common Stock will be based primarily upon the Company financial condition, results of operations, business requirements, price of its Common Stock in the case of the repurchase program, and Board of Directors continuing determination that the repurchase program and the declaration of dividends under the dividend policy are in the best interests of the Company stockholders and are in compliance with all laws and agreements applicable to the repurchase and dividend programs. We may not be able to attract, retain and develop key personnel. Our future performance depends in significant part upon the continued service of our executive officers and other key personnel. The loss of the services of 1 or more of our executive officers or other key employees could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations. This effect could be exacerbated if any officers or other key personnel left as a group. Our success also depends on our continuing ability to attract, retain and develop highly qualified personnel. Competition for such personnel is intense, and there can be no assurance that we can retain our key employees or attract, assimilate and retain other highly qualified personnel in the future. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS Not applicable. ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES. 
