CIK: 816956
Company Name: CONMED CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2012-02-28
Accession Number: 0000816956-12-000007


Item 1 Business Forward Looking Statements This Annual Report on Form 10 K for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2011 ( Form 10 K ) contains certain forward looking statements (as such term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995) and information relating to CONMED Corporation ( CONMED , the Company , we or us references to CONMED , the Company , we or us shall be deemed to include our direct and indirect subsidiaries unless the context otherwise requires) which are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by and information currently available to our management. When used in this Form 10 K, the words estimate, project, believe, anticipate, intend, expect and similar expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those identified under the caption Item 1A Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Form 10 K which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward looking statements. Such factors include, among others, the following general economic and business conditions; changes in foreign exchange and interest rates; cyclical customer purchasing patterns due to budgetary and other constraints; changes in customer preferences; competition; changes in technology; the introduction and acceptance of new products; the ability to evaluate, finance and integrate acquired businesses, products and companies; changes in business strategy; the availability and cost of materials; the possibility that United States or foreign regulatory and or administrative agencies may initiate enforcement actions against us or our distributors; future levels of indebtedness and capital spending; quality of our management and business abilities and the judgment of our personnel; the availability, terms and deployment of capital; the risk of litigation, especially patent litigation as well as the cost associated with patent and other litigation; the risk of a lack of allograft tissues due to reduced donations of such tissues or due to tissues not meeting the appropriate high standards for screening and or processing of such tissues; changes in regulatory requirements; and various other factors referenced in this Form 10 K. See Item 7 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations , Item 1 Business and Item 1A Risk Factors for a further discussion of these factors. You are cauti1d not to place undue reliance on these forward looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly release any revisions to these forward looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this Form 10 K or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. General CONMED Corporation was incorporated under the laws of the State of New York in 1970 by Eugene R. Corasanti, the Company founder and Chairman of the Board. CONMED is a medical technology company with an emphasis on surgical devices and equipment for minimally invasive procedures and monitoring. The Company products serve the clinical areas of arthroscopy, powered surgical instruments, electrosurgery, cardiac monitoring disposables, endosurgery and endoscopic technologies. They are used by surgeons and physicians in a variety of specialties including orthopedics, general surgery, gynecology, neurosurgery, and gastroenterology. Headquartered in Utica, New York, the Company 3,400 employees distribute its products worldwide from several manufacturing locations. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our reporting segments and financial information about geographic areas. We have historically used strategic business acquisitions and exclusive distribution relationships to diversify our product offerings, increase our market share in certain product lines, realize economies of scale and take advantage of growth opportunities in the healthcare field. 2 We are committed to offering products with the highest standards of quality, technological excellence and customer service. Substantially all of our facilities have attained certification under the ISO international quality standards and other domestic and international quality accreditations. Our annual report on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q, current reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports are accessible free of charge through the Investor Relations section of our website ( http www.conmed.com ) as soon as practicable after such materials have been electronically filed with, or furnished to, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Industry Market growth for our products is primarily driven by Favorable Demographics . The number of surgical procedures performed is increasing and we believe the long term demographic trend will be continued growth in surgical procedures as a result of the aging of the population, and technological advancements, which result in safer and less invasive (or non invasive) surgical procedures. Additionally, as people are living longer, more active lives, they are engaging in contact sports and activities such as running, skiing, rollerblading, golf and tennis which result in injuries with greater frequency and at an earlier age than ever before. Sales of surgical products aggregate to approximately 90% of our total net revenues in 2011 See Products. Continued Pressure to Reduce Health Care Costs . In response to rising health care costs, managed care companies and other third party payers have placed pressures on health care providers to reduce costs. As a result, health care providers have focused on the high cost areas such as surgery. To reduce costs, health care providers use minimally invasive techniques, which generally reduce patient trauma, recovery time and ultimately the length of hospitalization. Approximately 50% of our products are designed for use in minimally invasive surgical procedures. See Products. Health care providers are also increasingly purchasing single use, disposable products, which reduce the costs associated with sterilizing surgical instruments and products following surgery. The single use nature of disposable products lowers the risk of incorrectly sterilized instruments spreading infection into the patient and increasing the cost of post operative care. Approximately 75% of our sales are derived from single use disposable products. In the United States, the pressure on health care providers to contain costs has caused many health care providers to enter into comprehensive purchasing contracts with fewer suppliers, which offer a broader array of products at lower prices. In addition, many health care providers have aligned themselves with Group Purchasing Organizations ( GPOs ) or Integrated Health Ne2rks ( IHNs ), whose stated purpose is to aggregate the purchasing volume of their members in order to negotiate competitive pricing with suppliers, including manufacturers of surgical products. We believe that these trends will favor entities which offer a diverse product portfolio. See Business Strategy . Increased Global Medical Spending . We believe that foreign markets offer significant growth opportunities for our products. We currently distribute our products through our own sales subsidiaries or through local dealers in over 100 foreign countries. Competitive Strengths Management believes that we hold a significant market share position in each of our key product areas including, Arthroscopy, Powered Surgical Instruments, Electrosurgery, Patient Care, Endosurgery and Endoscopic Technologies. We have established a leadership position in the marketplace by capitalizing on the following competitive strengths Brand Recognition. Our products are marketed under leading brand names, including CONMED , CONMED Linvatec and Hall Surgical . These brand names are recognized by physicians and healthcare professionals for quality and service. It is our belief that brand recognition facilitates increased demand for our products in the marketplace, enables us to build upon the brand associated reputation for quality and service, and realize increased market acceptance of new branded products. Breadth of Product Offering. The breadth of our product lines in our key product areas enables us to meet a wide range of customer requirements and preferences. This has enhanced our ability to market our products to surgeons, hospitals, surgery centers, GPOs, IHNs and other customers, particularly as institutions seek to reduce costs and minimize the number of suppliers. 3 Successful Integration of Acquisitions. We seek to build growth platforms around our core markets through focused acquisitions of complementary businesses and product lines. These acquisitions have enabled us to diversify our product portfolio, expand our sales and marketing capabilities and strengthen our presence in key geographical markets. Strategic Marketing and Distribution Channels. We market our products domestically through five focused sales force groups consisting of approximately 230 employee sales representatives and 230 sales professionals employed by independent sales agent groups. Our dedicated sales professionals are highly knowledgeable in the applications and procedures for the products they sell. Our sales representatives foster close professional relationships with physicians, surgeons, hospitals, outpatient surgery centers and physicians offices. Additionally, we maintain a global presence through sales subsidiaries and branches located in key international markets. We directly service hospital customers located in these markets through an employee based international sales force of approximately 220 sales representatives. We also maintain distributor relationships domestically and in numerous countries worldwide. See Marketing. Operational Improvements and Manufacturing. We are focused on continuously improving our supply chain effectiveness, strengthening our manufacturing processes and optimizing our plant ne2rk to increase operational efficiencies within the organization. Substantially all of our products are manufactured and assembled from comp1nts we produce. Our strategy has historically been to vertically integrate our manufacturing facilities in order to develop a competitive advantage. This integration provides us with cost efficient and flexible manufacturing operations which permit us to allocate capital more efficiently. Additionally, we attempt to exploit commercial synergies between operations, such as the procurement of common raw materials and comp1nts used in production. Technological Leadership. Research and development efforts are closely aligned with our key business objectives, namely developing and improving products and processes, applying innovative technology to the manufacture of products for new global markets and reducing the cost of producing core products. These efforts are evidenced by recent product introductions, such as the PressFT Suture Anchor, Y Knot All suture Anchor, the Sequent Meniscal Repair System, XACTPIN Graft Passing Guide Pin, Hip Preservation System from access to repair, Bullseye Anatomic Cruciate Reconstruction System, the Hall Lithium Power Battery System and Altrus Thermal Tissue Fusion System. Business Strategy Our principal objectives are to improve the quality of surgical outcomes and patient care through the development of innovative medical devices, the refinement of existing products and the development of new technologies which reduce risk, trauma, cost and procedure time. We believe that by meeting these objectives we will enhance our ability to anticipate and adapt to customer needs and market opportunities, and provide shareholders with superior investment returns. We intend to achieve future growth and earnings development through the following initiatives Introduction of New Products and Product Enhancements. We continually pursue organic growth through the development of new products and enhancements to existing products. We seek to develop new technologies which improve the durability, performance and usability of existing products. In addition to our internal research and development efforts, we receive new ideas for products and technologies, particularly in procedure specific areas, from surgeons, inventors and other healthcare professionals. Pursue Strategic Acquisitions . We pursue strategic acquisitions, distribution and similar arrangements in existing and new growth markets to achieve increased operating efficiencies, geographic diversification and market penetration. Targeted companies have historically included those with proven technologies and established brand names which provide potential sales, marketing and manufacturing synergies. Realize Manufacturing and Operating Efficiencies. We continually review our production systems for opportunities to reduce operating costs, consolidate product lines or identical process flows, reduce inventory requirements and optimize existing processes. Our vertically integrated manufacturing facilities allow for further opportunities to reduce overhead, increase operating efficiencies and capacity utilization. Geographic Diversification. We believe that significant growth opportunities exist for our surgical products outside the United States. Principal foreign markets for our products include Europe, Latin America and Asia Pacific Rim. Critical elements of our future sales growth in these markets include leveraging our existing relationships with foreign surgeons, hospitals, third party payers and foreign distributors, maintaining an appropriate presence in emerging market countries and continually evaluating our routes to market. 4 Active Participation In The Medical Community. We believe that excellent working relationships with physicians and others in the medical industry enable us to gain an understanding of new therapeutic and diagnostic alternatives, trends and emerging opportunities. Active participation allows us to quickly respond to the changing needs of physicians and patients. Products The following table sets forth the percentage of net sales for each of our product lines during each of the 3 years ended December 31 Year Ended December 31, 2009 2010 2011 Arthroscopy 39 % 40 % 40 % Powered Surgical Instruments 21 20 20 Electrosurgery 14 14 14 Patient Care 10 10 9 Endosurgery 9 9 10 Endoscopic Technologies 7 7 7 Total 100 % 100 % 100 % Net Sales (in thousands) $ 694,739 $ 713,723 $ 725,077 Arthroscopy We offer a comprehensive range of devices and products for use in arthroscopic surgery. Arthroscopy refers to diagnostic and therapeutic surgical procedures performed on joints with the use of minimally invasive arthroscopes and related instruments. Minimally invasive arthroscopic procedures enable surgical repairs to be completed with less trauma to the patient, resulting in shorter recovery times and cost savings. Arthroscopic procedures are performed on the knee, shoulder, and hip as well as smaller joints, such as the hand, wrist and ankle. Our arthroscopy products include powered resection instruments, arthroscopes, reconstructive systems, tissue repair sets, metal and bioabsorbable implants and related disposable products and fluid management systems. We also offer a line of video Endoscopy products suitable for use in multi specialty clinical environments beyond orthopedic arthroscopy, including laparoscopy, ENT, gynecology and urology as well as integrated operating room systems and equipment. It is our standard practice to place some of these products, such as shaver consoles and pumps, with certain customers at no charge in exchange for commitments to purchase disposable products over certain time periods. This capital equipment is loaned and subject to return if certain minimum single use purchases are not met. Single use products include products such as shaver blades, burs and pump tubing. We have benefited from the introduction of new arthroscopic products and technologies, such as bioabsorbable screws, ablators, push in and screw in suture anchors, and resection shavers. As more fully described in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, on January 3, 2012, we entered into a joint development and distribution agreement with the Muskuloskeletal Tissue Foundation ( MTF ) to obtain the exclusive worldwide rights to promote its allograft tissues in the field of sports medicine and extremity reconstruction. Allograft is a tissue form derived from another human donor, tested, processed and subsequently surgically implanted into the human body to repair a defect or injury. Under the terms of this agreement, we are now the exclusive worldwide promoter of these allograft tissues, which includes the reconstruction and or replacement of tendon, ligament, cartilage or menisci, along with the correction of deformities within the extremities. Additionally, under the framework of this transaction with MTF, we acquired an exclusive worldwide license in the fields of sports medicine, extremities, and wound care to distribute an autologous platelet enrichment system (Casacade ), which is used to concentrate a patient own platelets for the treatment of acute or chronic conditions at an injury site. A significant portion of arthroscopic procedures are performed to repair injuries which have occurred in the articulating joint areas of the body. Many of these injuries are the result of sports related events or similar traumas. For this reason, arthroscopy is often referred to as sports medicine. 5 Arthroscopy Product Description Brand Name Ablators and Shaver Ablators Electrosurgical ablators and resection ablators to resect and remove soft tissue and b1; used in knee, shoulder and small joint surgery. Lightwave Trident Knee Reconstructive Systems Products used in cruciate reconstructive surgery; includes instrumentation, screws, pins and ligament harvesting and preparation devices. Pinn ACL Grafix Matryx Bioscrew EndoPearl XtraLok Sequent Soft Tissue Repair Systems Instrument systems designed to attach specific torn or damaged soft tissue to b1 or other soft tissue in the knee, shoulder and wrist; includes instrumentation, guides, hooks and suture devices. Spectrum Inteq Shuttle Relay Blitz Hi Fi Suture Saver Spectrum MVP Super Shuttle Fluid Management Systems Disposable tubing sets, disposable and reusable inflow devices, pumps and suction waste management systems for use in arthroscopic and general surgeries. Apex Quick Flow Quick Connect 87K 10K 24K Video Surgical video systems for endoscopic procedures; includes high definition (HD), autoclavable 3 chip camera heads as well as camera consoles, endoscopes, light sources, monitors, image capture devices and printers. Sm@rt OR Quicklatch scopes Shock Flex prism mount TrueHD IM4000 HD camera system Implants Products including bioabsorbable and metal screws, pins and suture anchors for attaching soft tissue to b1 in the knee, shoulder, wrist, and hip as well as meniscal repair. BioScrew Bio Anchor BioTwist UltraFix Revo Super Revo Bionx Meniscus Arrow Smart Nail Smart Pin The Wedge Biostinger Hornet ThRevo Duet Impact Bio Mini Revo XO Button Paladin Presto SRS PopLok CrossFT Y Knot 6 Arthroscopy Product Description Brand Name Integrated operating room systems and equipment Centralized operating room management and control systems. CONMED Nurse Assistant Sm@rt OR Arthroscopic Shaver Systems Electrically powered shaver handpieces that accommodate a large variety of shaver blade disposables specific to clinical specialty and technological precision. Advantage Turbo Gator Great White Mako Merlin Sterling Ultracut Zen ReAct Ergo Materials GENESYS Promotion rights to allograft tissue for sports medicine We have exclusive promotion rights to Musculoskeletal Tissue Foundation's ("MTF") allograft tissue for sports medicine Platelet Rich Plasma Therapy Products Platelet rich therapies which include platelet rich plasma, membrane and matrix applications. Cascade Autologous Platelet System Other Instruments and Accessories Forceps, graspers, punches, probes, sterilization cases and other general instruments for arthroscopic procedures. Shutt Concept TractionTower Clearflex SE Dry Doc Cannulae Hip Arthroscopy Kit Powered Surgical Instruments Electric, battery or pneumatic powered surgical instruments are used to perform orthopedic, arthroscopic and other surgical procedures where cutting, drilling or reaming of b1 is required. Each power system consists of 1 or more handpieces and related accessories as well as disposable and limited reusable Item (e.g., burs, saw blades, drills and reamers). Powered instruments are categorized as either small b1, large b1 or specialty powered instruments. Specialty powered instruments are utilized in procedures such as spinal surgery, neurosurgery, ENT, oral maxillofacial surgery, and cardiothoracic surgery. Our line of powered instruments is sold principally under the Hall Surgical brand name, for use in large and small b1 orthopedic, arthroscopic, oral maxillofacial, podiatric, plastic, ENT, neurological, spinal and cardiothoracic surgeries. Large b1, neurosurgical, spinal and cardiothoracic powered instruments are sold primarily to hospitals while small b1 arthroscopic, otolaryngological and oral maxillofacial powered instruments are sold to hospitals, outpatient facilities and physicians offices. Our CONMED Linvatec subsidiary has devoted significant resources in the development of new technologies for battery, electric and pneumatic powertool platforms which may be easily adapted and modified for new procedures. Our powered instruments product line includes the MPower Battery System. This full function orthopedic power system is specifically designed to meet the requirements of most orthopedic applications. The modularity and versatility of the MPower system allows a facility to purchase a single power system to perform total joint arthroplasty, trauma, arthroscopy, and small b1 procedures. The system also provides a multitude of battery technologies to meet the varying needs of hospitals worldwide. 7 Powered Surgical Instruments Product Description Brand Name Large B1 Powered saws, drills and related disposable accessories for use primarily in total knee and hip joint replacements and trauma surgical procedures. Hall Surgical PowerPro PowerProMax MPower Small B1 Powered saws, drills and related disposable accessories for hand, foot, and other small b1 related surgical procedures. Hall Surgical MicroPower Micro 100 Surgairtome 2 MPower Otolaryngology Neurosurgery Spine Oral maxillofacial Specialty powered saws, drills and related disposable accessories for use in neurosurgery, spine, otolaryngologic and oral maxillofacial procedures. Hall Surgical E9000 UltraPower Hall Osteon Hall Ototome Coolflex Surgairtome 2 SmartGuard Cardiothoracic Powered sternum saws and related disposable accessories for use by cardiothoracic surgeons. Hall Surgical MicroPower Micro 100 PowerPro PowerProMax MPower Electrosurgery The use of electrosurgical units and associated surgical tools is commonplace in the hospital surgical suite, surgery centers, clinics and physician offices. Electrosurgery is routinely used to cut and coagulate tissue and small vessels in open and laparoscopic procedures using energy produced through radio frequency (RF) technology. An electrosurgical system consists of 3 main comp1nts an electrosurgical generator or ESU, an active electrode in the form of an electrosurgical pencil or instrument that is used to apply concentrated energy to the target tissues, and a dispersive electrode that grounds the patient and provides feedback to the ESU. Electrosurgery can be used in almost all surgical procedures including specialties such as general, gynecology, orthopedics, cardiology, thoracics, urology, neurology, and dermatology. Also included in our portfolio of energy based products is the Argon Beam Coagulation (ABC ) technology. ABC technology combines the use of argon gas and electrosurgical energy to allow the surgeon to produce a surface coagulation which results in less tissue damage. The electrical energy travels through an ionized column of gas so that the energy is applied to bleeding tissue in a non contact mode. Clinicians have reported notable benefits of ABC technology in certain procedures such as liver resection, cancer tissue resection, heart bypass and trauma. In addition, certain handpieces allow ABC to be used to dissect tissue through direct contact. Surgical smoke evacuation products are an emerging segment within the electrosurgical market. These systems consist of a smoke evacuation unit which suctions surgical smoke from the operative site and filters the smoke plume. It is connected to the ESU and uses specific electrosurgical smoke evacuation pencils. The use of electrosurgical pencils and lasers during a procedure may produce smoke and may affect the surgeon ability to see the operative site clearly in both open and laparoscopic procedures. 8 Electrosurgery Product Description Brand Name Pencils Disposable and reusable surgical instruments designed to deliver high frequency electrical energy to cut and or coagulate tissue. Hand Trol GoldLine Ground Pads Disposable ground pads which disperse electrosurgical energy and safely return it to the generator; available in adult, pediatric and infant sizes. MacroLyte ThermoGard SureFit Active Electrodes Surgical accessory electrodes that are inserted into electrosurgical pencils. These electrodes are available with and without the proprietary UltraClean coating which provides an easy to clean electrode surface during surgery. UltraClean Generators Monopolar and bipolar clinical energy sources for surgical procedures performed in a hospital, physician's office or clinical setting. System 5000 System 2450 Hyfrecator Sabre Genesis Argon Beam Coagulation Systems Specialized electrosurgical generators, disposable hand pieces and ground pads for Argon Enhanced non contact coagulation of tissues. ABC System 7550 ABC Flex Bend A Beam ABC Dissecting Electrodes Smoke Evacuation System Dedicated unit and integrated hand pieces designed for the removal of surgical smoke in both open and laparoscopic procedures where electrosurgery is utilized. GoldVac ClearVac AER DEFENSE Vessel Sealing System A direct thermal based multi functional surgical tool that seals, cuts, grasps and dissects vessels and tissue bundles. Altrus Patient Care Our patient care product line offering includes a line of vital signs and cardiac monitoring products including pulse oximetry equipment & sensors, ECG electrodes and cables, cardiac defibrillation & pacing pads and blood pressure cuffs. We also offer a complete line of suction instruments & tubing for use in the operating room, as well as a line of IV products for use in the critical care areas of the hospital. 9 Patient Care Product Description Brand Name ECG Monitoring Line of disposable electrodes, monitoring cables, lead wire products and accessories designed to transmit ECG signals from the heart to an ECG monitor or recorder. CONMED Ultratrace Cleartrace Surgical Suction Instruments and Tubing Disposable surgical suction instruments and connecting tubing, including Yankauer, Poole, Frazier and Sigmoidoscopic instrumentation, for use by physicians in the majority of open surgical procedures. CONMED Intravenous Therapy Disposable IV drip rate gravity controller and disposable catheter stabilization dressing designed to hold and secure an IV needle or catheter for use in IV therapy. VENI GARD MasterFlow Stat 2 Defibrillator Pads and Accessories Stimulation electrodes for use in emergency cardiac response and conduction studies of the heart. PadPro R2 Pulse Oximetry Used in critical care to continuously monitor a patient arterial blood oxygen saturation and pulse rate. Dolphin Pro2 Cardiac Output Monitoring Used in measuring volume of blood flow that is pumped from the heart and other hemodynamic functions. ECOM Non invasive blood pressure cuff Used in critical care to measure blood pressure. SoftCheck UltraCheck (registered trademarks of CAS Medical Systems, Inc.) Endosurgery Endosurgery (also referred to as minimally invasive surgery or laparoscopic surgery) is surgery performed without a major incision. This surgical specialty results in less trauma for the patient and produces important cost savings as a result of shorter recovery times and reduced hospitalization. Endosurgery is performed on organs in the abdominal cavity such as the gallbladder, appendix and female reproductive organs. During such procedures, devices called trocars are used to puncture the abdominal wall and are then removed, leaving in place a trocar cannula. The trocar cannula provides access into the abdomen for camera systems and surgical instruments. Some of our endosurgical instruments are reposable , meaning that the instrument has a disposable and a reusable comp1nt. Our Endosurgical products include the Reflex and PermaClip clip appliers for vessel and duct ligation, Universal S I (suction irrigation) and Universal Plus laparoscopic instruments, specialized suction irrigation electrosurgical instrument systems for use in laparoscopic surgery and the 1Port which incorporates a blunt tipped version of a trocar. The 1Port dilates access through the body wall rather than cutting with the sharp, pointed tips of conventional trocars thus resulting in smaller wounds, and less bleeding. We also offer cutting trocars, suction irrigation accessories, laparoscopic scissors, dissectors and graspers, active electrodes, insufflation needles and linear cutters and staplers for use in laparoscopic surgery. Our disposable skin staplers are used to close large skin incisions with surgical staples, thus eliminating the time consuming suturing process. ConMed Endosurgery also offers a unique and premium uterine manipulator called VCARE for use in increasing the efficiency of laparoscopic hysterectomies and other gynecologic laparoscopic procedures. 10 Endosurgery Product Description Brand Name Trocars Disposable and reposable devices used to puncture the abdominal wall providing access to the abdominal cavity for camera systems and instruments. 1Port TroGard Finesse Reflex Detach a Port CORE Dynamics Multi functional Electrosurgery and Suction Irrigation Instruments Instruments for cutting and coagulating tissue by delivering high frequency current. Instruments which deliver irrigating fluid to the tissue and remove blood and fluids from the internal operating field. Universal Universal Plus FloVac Clip Appliers Disposable and reposable devices for ligating blood vessels and ducts by placing a titanium clip on the vessel. Reflex PermaClip Laparoscopic Instruments Scissors, graspers DetachaTip Skin Staplers Disposable devices which place surgical staples for closing a surgical incision. Reflex Uterine Manipulators Specialized elevator, retractor, manipulator for laparoscopic hysterectomy and other laparoscopic gynecological procedures. VCARE Endoscopic Technologies Gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy is the examination of the digestive tract with a flexible, lighted instrument referred to as an "endoscope". This instrument enables the physician to directly visualize the esophagus, stomach, portions of the small intestine, and colon. This technology allows the physician to more accurately diagnose and treat diseases of the digestive system. Through these scopes a physician may take biopsies, dilate narrowed areas referred to as strictures, and remove polyps which are growths in the digestive tract. Some of the more common conditions which may be diagnosed and treated using this procedure include ulcers, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis and gallbladder disease. We offer a comprehensive line of minimally invasive diagnostic and therapeutic products used in conjunction with procedures which require flexible endoscopy. Our principal customers include GI endoscopists, pulmonologists, and nurses who perform both diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopic procedures in hospitals and outpatient clinics. Our primary focus is to identify, develop, acquire, manufacture and market differentiated medical devices, which improve outcomes in the diagnosis and treatment of gastrointestinal and pulmonary disorders. Our diagnostic and therapeutic product offerings for GI and pulmonology include mucosal management devices, forceps, scope management accessories, bronchoscopy devices, dilatation, stricture management devices, hemostasis, biliary devices, and polypectomy. 11 Endoscopic Technologies Product Description Brand Name Pulmonary Transbronchial Cytology and Histology Aspiration Needles, Disposable Biopsy Forceps, Cytology Brushes and Bronchoscope Cleaning Brushes Wang Blue Bullet Precisor Precisor BRONCHO Precisor EXL GARG Biopsy Disposable biopsy forceps, Percutaneous Liver Biopsy instrument, Disposable Cytology Brushes Precisor OptiBite Monopty Polypectomy Disposable Polypectomy Snares, Retrieval Nets, Polyp Traps Singular Optimizer Nakao Spider Net Orbit Snare Biliary Triple Lumen St1 Removal Balloons, Advanced Cannulation Triple Lumen Papillotomes, High Performance Biliary Guidewires, Cannulas, Biliary Balloon Dilators, Plastic and Self Expanding Metal Endoscopic Biliary Stents (SEMS) Apollo Apollo3 Apollo3AC FXWire XWire Director Duraglide Duraglide 3 Flexxus ProForma HYDRODUCT Viabil Dilation Multi Stage Balloon Dilators, American Dilation System Eliminator Hemostasis Endoscopic Injection Needles, Endoscopic and Multi Band Ligators, Sclerotherapy Needle, Bipolar Hemostasis Probes SureShot Stiegmann Goff Bandito Flexitip BICAP BICAP SUPERCONDUCTOR Click Tip Beamer Beamer Mate Beamer Plus Endoscopic Ultrasound Fine Needle Aspiration Vizeon Enteral Feeding Initial Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) systems, Replacement Tri Funnel G Tube EnTake Accessories Disposable Bite Blocks, Cleaning Brushes Scope Saver Channel Master Blue Bullet Whistle 12 Marketing A significant portion of our products are distributed domestically directly to more than 6,000 hospitals and other healthcare institutions as well as through medical specialty distributors and surgeons. We are not dependent on any single customer and no single customer accounted for more than 10% of our net sales in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . A significant portion of our U.S. sales are to customers affiliated with GPOs, IHNs and other large national or regional accounts, as well as to the Veterans Administration and other hospitals operated by the Federal government. For hospital inventory management purposes, some of our customers prefer to purchase our products through independent third party medical product distributors. In order to provide a high level of expertise to the medical specialties we serve, our domestic sales force consists of the following 40 employee sales representatives and 230 sales representatives working for independent sales agent groups selling arthroscopy and powered surgical instrument products; 60 employee sales representatives selling electrosurgery products; 45 employee sales representatives selling endosurgery products; 45 employee sales representatives selling patient care products; 40 employee sales representatives selling endoscopic technologies products. Each employee sales representative is assigned a defined geographic area and compensated on a commission basis or through a combination of salary and commission. The sales force is supervised and supported by either area directors or district managers. Sales agent groups are used in the United States to sell our arthroscopy, multi specialty medical video systems and powered surgical instrument products. These sales agent groups are paid a commission for sales made to customers while home office sales and marketing management provide the overall direction for sales of our products. Our Corporate sales organization is responsible for interacting with large regional and national accounts (e.g. GPOs, IHNs, etc.). We have contracts with many such organizations and believe that the loss of any individual group purchasing contract will not adversely impact our business. In addition, all of our sales professionals are required to work closely with distributors where applicable and maintain close relationships with end users. Each of our dedicated sales professionals is highly knowledgeable in the applications and procedures for the products they sell. Our sales professionals provide surgeons and medical personnel with information relating to the technical features and benefits of our products. Maintaining and expanding our international presence is an important comp1nt of our long term growth plan. Our products are sold in over 100 foreign countries. International sales efforts are coordinated through local country dealers or through direct in country sales. We distribute our products through sales subsidiaries and branches with offices located in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Korea, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Italy, Poland, China and the United Kingdom. In these countries, our sales are denominated in the local currency and amounted to approximately 33% of our total net sales in 2011 . In the remaining countries where our products are sold through independent distributors, sales are denominated in United States dollars. We sell to a diversified base of customers around the world and, therefore, believe there is no material concentration of credit risk. Manufacturing We manufacture substantially all of our products and assemble them from comp1nts, many of which we produce. Our strategy has historically been to vertically integrate our manufacturing facilities in order to develop a competitive advantage. This integration provides us with cost efficient and flexible manufacturing operations which permit us to allocate capital more efficiently. Additionally, we attempt to exploit commercial synergies between operations, such as the procurement of common raw materials and comp1nts used in production. Raw material costs constitute a substantial portion of our cost of production. We use numerous raw materials and comp1nts in the design, development and manufacturing of our products. Substantially all of our raw materials and select comp1nts used in the manufacturing process are procured from external suppliers. We work closely with multiple suppliers to ensure continuity of supply while maintaining high quality and reliability. N1 of our critical raw materials and comp1nts are 13 procured from single sources for reasons of quality assurance, sole source availability, cost effectiveness or constraints resulting from regulatory requirements. The loss of any existing supplier or supplier contract would not have a material adverse effect on our financial and operational performance. To date, we have not experienced any protracted interruption in the availability of raw materials and comp1nts necessary to fulfill production schedules. All of our products are classified as medical devices subject to regulation by numerous agencies and legislative bodies, including the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) and comparable foreign counter parts. The FDA Quality System Regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for on site inspections of our facilities by the FDA. In many of the foreign countries in which we manufacture and distribute our products we are subject to regulatory requirements affecting, among other things, product performance standards, packaging requirements, labeling requirements, import laws and onsite inspection by independent bodies with the authority to issue or not issue certifications we may require to be able to sell products in certain countries. Regulatory requirements affecting the Company vary from country to country. The timeframes and costs for regulatory submission and approval from foreign agencies or legislative bodies may vary from those required by the FDA. Certain requirements for approval from foreign agencies or legislative bodies may also differ from those of the FDA. We believe that our production and inventory management practices are characteristic of those in the medical device industry. Substantially all of our products are stocked in inventory and are not manufactured to order or to individual customer specifications. We schedule production and maintain adequate levels of safety stock based on a number of factors including, experience, knowledge of customer ordering patterns, demand, manufacturing lead times and optimal quantities required to maintain the highest possible service levels. Customer orders are generally processed for immediate shipment and backlog of firm orders is therefore not considered material to an understanding of our business. Research and Development New and improved products play a critical role in our continued sales growth. Internal research and development efforts focus on the development of new products and product technological and design improvements aimed at complementing and expanding existing product lines. We continually seek to leverage new technologies which improve the durability, performance and usability of existing products. In addition, we maintain close working relationships with surgeons, inventors and operating room personnel who often make new product and technology disclosures, principally in procedure specific areas. For clinical and commercially promising disclosures, we seek to obtain rights to these ideas through negotiated agreements. Such agreements typically compensate the originator through payments based upon a percentage of licensed product net sales. Annual royalty expense approximated $35 million , $33 million and $29 million in 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 , respectively. Amounts expended for Company research and development was approximately $318 million , $29.7 million and $28.7 million during 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 , respectively. We have rights to intellectual property, including United States patents and foreign equivalent patents which cover a wide range of our products. We own a majority of these patents and have exclusive and non exclusive licensing rights to the remainder. In addition, certain of these patents have currently been licensed to third parties on a non exclusive basis. We believe that the development of new products and technological and design improvements to existing products will continue to be of primary importance in maintaining our competitive position. Competition The market for our products is highly competitive and our customers generally have numerous alternatives of supply. Many of our competitors offer a range of products in areas other than those in which we compete, which may make such competitors more attractive to surgeons, hospitals, group purchasing organizations and others. In addition, several of our competitors are large, technically competent firms with substantial assets. 14 The following chart identifies our principal competitors in each of our key business areas Business Area Competitor Arthroscopy Smith & Nephew, plc Arthrex, Inc. Stryker Corporation ArthroCare Corporation Johnson & Johnson DePuy Mitek, Inc. Biomet, Inc. Powered Surgical Instruments Stryker Corporation Medtronic, Inc. Midas Rex and Xomed divisions Synvasive Technology, Inc. Synthes, Inc. MicroAire Surgical Instruments, LLC Electrosurgery Covidien Ltd.; Valleylab 3M Company ERBE Elektromedizin GmbH Patient Care Covidien Ltd. Kendall 3M Company Endosurgery Johnson & Johnson Ethicon Endo Surgery, Inc. Covidien Ltd.; U.S.Surgical Endoscopic Technologies Boston Scientific Corporation Endoscopy Wilson Cook Medical, Inc. Olympus America, Inc. U.S. Endoscopy Factors which affect our competitive posture include product design, customer acceptance, service and delivery capabilities, pricing and product development improvement. In the future, other alternatives such as new medical procedures or pharmaceuticals may become interchangeable alternatives to our products. Government Regulation and Quality Systems Substantially all of our products are classified as class II medical devices subject to regulation by numerous agencies and legislative bodies, including the FDA and comparable foreign counterparts. Authorization to commercially market our products in the U.S. is granted by the FDA under a procedure referred to as 510(k) premarket notification. This process requires us to demonstrate that our new products or substantially modified products are substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device which was on the market prior to May 28, 1976 or is currently on the U.S. market and does not require premarket approval. We must continually meet certain FDA requirements to market our products in the United States. (Our products are classified as Class I, IIa, IIb and III in the European Union (EU) and subject to regulation by the Medical Device Directive.). Our FDA clearance is subject to continual review and future discovery of previously unknown events could result in restrictions being placed on a product marketing or notification from the FDA to halt the distribution of certain medical devices. Medical device regulations continue to evolve world wide. Products marketed in the EU and other countries require preparation of technical files and design dossiers which demonstrate compliance with applicable international regulations. Products marketed in Australia are subject to a new classification system and have been re registered under the updated Therapeutics Goods Act in 2007. Products marketed in Japan must be re registered under the Ministry of Health recently updated Pharmaceutical Affairs Law (PAL). As government regulations continue to change, there is a risk that the distribution of some of our products may be interrupted or discontinued if they do not meet the new requirements. Our operations are supported by quality system regulatory compliance personnel tasked with monitoring compliance to design controls, process controls and the other relevant government regulations for all of our design, manufacturing, distribution and servicing activities. We and substantially all of our products are subject to the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938, as amended by the Medical Device Amendments of 1976, Safe Medical Device Act of 1990, Medical 15 Device Modernization Act of 1997, Medical User Fee and Modernization Act of 2002 and similar international regulations, such as the European Union Medical Device Directives. As a manufacturer of medical devices, the FDA Quality System Regulations as specified in Title 21, Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) part 820, set forth requirements for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records, provide for on site inspection of our facilities and continuing review by the FDA. Many of our products are also subject to industry defined standards. Such industry defined product standards are generally formulated by committees of the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI), International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). We believe that our products and processes presently meet applicable standards in all material respects. As noted above, our facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the FDA for, among other things, conformance to Quality System Regulation and Current Good Manufacturing Practice ( CGMP ) requirements. Following an inspection, the FDA typically provides its observations, if any, in the form of a Form 483 (Notice of Inspectional Observations) with specific observations concerning potential violation of regulations. Although we respond to all Form 483 observations and correct deficiencies expeditiously, there can be no assurance that the FDA will not take further action including issuing a warning letter, seizing product and imposing fines. We market our products in several foreign countries and therefore are subject to regulations affecting, among other things, product standards, sterilization, packaging requirements, labeling requirements, import laws and onsite inspection by independent bodies with the authority to issue or not issue certifications we may require to be able to sell products in certain countries. Many of the regulations applicable to our devices and products in these countries are similar to those of the FDA. The member countries of the European Union have adopted the European Medical Device Directives, which create a single set of medical device regulations for all member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in the European Union maintain quality system certification through European Union recognized Notified Bodies. These Notified Bodies authorize the use of the CE Mark allowing free movement of our products throughout the member countries. Requirements pertaining to our products vary widely from country to country, ranging from simple product registrations to detailed submissions such as those required by the FDA. We believe that our products and quality procedures currently meet applicable standards for the countries in which they are marketed. Our products may become subject to recall or market withdrawal regulations and we have made product recall decisions in the past. No product recall has had a material effect on our financial condition, however there can be no assurance that regulatory issues will not have a material adverse effect in the future. Any change in existing federal, state, foreign laws or regulations, or in the interpretation or enforcement thereof, or the promulgation or any additional laws or regulations may result in a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. Employees As of December 31, 2011 , we had approximately 3,400 full time employees, including approximately 2,000 in operations, 130 in research and development, and the remaining in sales, marketing and related administrative support. We believe that we have good relations with our employees and have never experienced a strike or similar work stoppage. N1 of our domestic employees are represented by a labor union. Item 1A. Risk Factors An investment in our securities, including our common stock, involves a high degree of risk. Investors should carefully consider the specific factors set forth below as well as the other information included or incorporated by reference in this Form 10 K. See Forward Looking Statements . Our financial performance is dependent on conditions in the health care industry and the broader economy. The results of our business are directly tied to the economic conditions in the health care industry and the broader economy as a whole. Significant volatility in the financial markets and foreign currency exchange rates and depressed economic conditions in both domestic and international markets, have presented significant business challenges since the second half of 2008. While we returned to revenue growth in 2010 and 2011 and are cautiously optimistic that the domestic economic environment is improving, conditions in Europe and elsewhere may present significant business challenges for the Company, and there can be no assurance that improvement in the overall economic environment will be sustained. Approximately 25% of our revenues are derived from the sale of capital products. The sales of such products are negatively impacted if hospitals and other healthcare providers are unable to secure the financing necessary to purchase these products 16 or otherwise defer purchases. Our significant international operations subject us to foreign currency fluctuations and other risks associated with operating in foreign countries . A significant portion of our revenues are derived from foreign sales. Approximately 50% of our total 2011 consolidated net sales were to customers outside the United States. We have sales subsidiaries in a significant number of countries in Europe as well as Australia, Canada and Korea. In those countries in which we have a direct presence, our sales are denominated in the local currency and those sales denominated in local currency amounted to approximately 33% of our total net sales in 2011 The remaining 17% of sales to customers outside the United States was on an export basis and transacted in United States dollars. Because a significant portion of our operations consist of sales activities in foreign jurisdictions, our financial results may be affected by factors such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the markets in which we distribute products. While we have implemented a hedging strategy, our revenues may be unfavorably impacted from foreign currency translation if the United States dollar strengthens as compared with currencies such as the Euro. Our international presence exposes us to certain other inherent risks, including imposition of limitations on conversions of foreign currencies into dollars or remittance of dividends and other payments by international subsidiaries; imposition or increase of withholding and other taxes on remittances and other payments by international subsidiaries; trade barriers; political risks, including political instability; reliance on third parties to distribute our products; hyperinflation in certain foreign countries; and imposition or increase of investment and other restrictions by foreign governments. We cannot assure you that such risks will not have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. Our financial performance is subject to the risks inherent in our acquisition strategy, including the effects of increased borrowing and integration of newly acquired businesses or product lines . A key element of our business strategy has been to expand through acquisitions and we may seek to pursue additional acquisitions in the future. Our success is dependent in part upon our ability to integrate acquired companies or product lines into our existing operations. We may not have sufficient management and other resources to accomplish the integration of our past and future acquisitions and implementing our acquisition strategy may strain our relationship with customers, suppliers, distributors, manufacturing personnel or others. There can be no assurance that we will be able to identify and make acquisitions on acceptable terms or that we will be able to obtain financing for such acquisitions on acceptable terms. In addition, while we are generally entitled to customary indemnification from sellers of businesses for any difficulties that may have arisen prior to our acquisition of each business, acquisitions may involve exposure to unknown liabilities and the amount and time for claiming under these indemnification provisions is often limited. As a result, our financial performance is now and will continue to be subject to various risks associated with the acquisition of businesses, including the financial effects associated with any increased borrowing required to fund such acquisitions or with the integration of such businesses. Our financial performance may be adversely impacted by the recently passed healthcare reform legislation. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Affordability Reconciliation Act were enacted into law in the U.S. in March 2010. As a U.S. headquartered company with 50% of our 2011 sales derived in the U.S., this legislation will materially impact us. Among other initiatives, this legislation imposes a 23% excise tax on domestic sales of class I, II, and III medical devices beginning in 2013 Substantially all of our products are class II medical devices. If we are unable to raise prices or otherwise pass through this tax to our customers, this enacted excise tax on medical devices could materially and adversely affect our results of operations and cash flows. Other provisions of this legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at improving quality and decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, could meaningfully change the way healthcare is developed and delivered, and may adversely affect our business and results of operations. Alternatively, this legislation purports to increase the size of the market for our products, potentially offsetting other negative impacts of the legislation. Further, we cannot predict what healthcare programs and 17 regulations will be ultimately implemented at the federal or state level, or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the U.S. or internationally. However, any changes that lower reimbursements for our products or reduce medical procedure volumes could adversely affect our results of operations and cash flows. Failure to comply with regulatory requirements may result in recalls, fines or materially adverse implications . Substantially all of our products are classified as class II medical devices subject to regulation by numerous agencies and legislative bodies, including the FDA and comparable foreign counterparts. As a manufacturer of medical devices, our manufacturing processes and facilities are subject to on site inspection and continuing review by the FDA for compliance with the Quality System Regulations. Manufacturing and sales of our products outside the United States are also subject to foreign regulatory requirements which vary from country to country. Moreover, we are generally required to obtain regulatory clearance or approval prior to marketing a new product. The time required to obtain approvals from foreign countries may be longer or shorter than that required for FDA clearance, and requirements for foreign approvals may differ from FDA requirements. Failure to comply with applicable domestic and or foreign regulatory requirements may result in fines or other enforcement actions; recall or seizure of products; total or partial suspension of production; loss of certification; withdrawal of existing product approvals or clearances; refusal to approve or clear new applications or notices; increased quality control costs; or criminal prosecution. Failure to comply with Quality System Regulations and applicable foreign regulations could result in a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If we are not able to manufacture products in compliance with regulatory standards, we may decide to cease manufacturing of those products and may be subject to product recall. In addition to the Quality System Regulations, many of our products are also subject to industry defined standards. We may not be able to comply with these regulations and standards due to deficiencies in comp1nt parts or our manufacturing processes. If we are not able to comply with the Quality System Regulations or industry defined standards, we may not be able to fill customer orders and we may decide to cease production of non compliant products. Failure to produce products could affect our profit margins and could lead to loss of customers. Our products are subject to product recall and we have made product recalls in the past. Although no recall has had a material adverse effect on our business or financial condition, we cannot assure you that regulatory issues will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations in the future or that product recalls will not harm our reputation and our customer relationships. The highly competitive market for our products may create adverse pricing pressures. The market for our products is highly competitive and our customers have numerous alternatives of supply. Many of our competitors offer a range of products in areas other than those in which we compete, which may make such competitors more attractive to surgeons, hospitals, group purchasing organizations and others. In addition, several of our competitors are large, technically competent firms with substantial assets. Competitive pricing pressures or the introduction of new products by our competitors could have an adverse effect on our revenues. See Competition for a further discussion of these competitive forces. Factors which may influence our customers choice of competitor products include changes in surgeon preferences; increases or decreases in health care spending related to medical devices; our inability to supply products to them, as a result of product recall, market withdrawal or back order; the introduction by competitors of new products or new features to existing products; the introduction by competitors of alternative surgical technology; and advances in surgical procedures, discoveries or developments in the health care industry. 18 We use a variety of raw materials in our businesses, and significant shortages or price increases could increase our operating costs and adversely impact the competitive positions of our products. Our reliance on certain suppliers and commodity markets to secure raw materials used in our products exposes us to volatility in the prices and availability of raw materials. In some instances, we participate in commodity markets that may be subject to allocations by suppliers. A disruption in deliveries from our suppliers, price increases, or decreased availability of raw materials or commodities, could have an adverse effect on our ability to meet our commitments to customers or increase our operating costs. We believe that our supply management practices are based on an appropriate balancing of the foreseeable risks and the costs of alternative practices. N1theless, price increases or the unavailability of some raw materials may have an adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. Cost reduction efforts in the health care industry could put pressures on our prices and margins. In recent years, the health care industry has underg1 significant change driven by various efforts to reduce costs. Such efforts include national health care reform, trends towards managed care, cuts in Medicare, consolidation of health care distribution companies and collective purchasing arrangements by GPOs and IHNs. Demand and prices for our products may be adversely affected by such trends. We may not be able to keep pace with technological change or to successfully develop new products with wide market acceptance, which could cause us to lose business to competitors. The market for our products is characterized by rapidly changing technology. Our future financial performance will depend in part on our ability to develop and manufacture new products on a cost effective basis, to introduce them to the market on a timely basis, and to have them accepted by surgeons. We may not be able to keep pace with technology or to develop viable new products. Factors which may result in delays of new product introductions or cancellation of our plans to manufacture and market new products include capital constraints; research and development delays; delays in securing regulatory approvals; or changes in the competitive landscape, including the emergence of alternative products or solutions which reduce or eliminate the markets for pending products. Our new products may fail to achieve expected levels of market acceptance. New product introductions may fail to achieve market acceptance. The degree of market acceptance for any of our products will depend upon a number of factors, including our ability to develop and introduce new products and product enhancements in the time frames we currently estimate; our ability to successfully implement new technologies; the market readiness to accept new products; having adequate financial and technological resources for future product development and promotion; the efficacy of our products; and the prices of our products compared to the prices of our competitors products. If our new products do not achieve market acceptance, we may be unable to recover our investments and may lose business to competitors. In addition, some of the companies with which we now compete or may compete in the future have or may have more extensive research, marketing and manufacturing capabilities and significantly greater technical and personnel resources than we do, and may be better positi1d to continue to improve their technology in order to compete in an evolving industry. See Competition for a further discussion of these competitive forces. 19 Our senior credit agreement contains covenants which may limit our flexibility or prevent us from taking actions. Our senior credit agreement contains, and future credit facilities are expected to contain, certain restrictive covenants which will affect, and in many respects significantly limit or prohibit, among other things, our ability to incur indebtedness; make investments; engage in transactions with affiliates; pay dividends or make other distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, capital stock; sell assets; and pursue acquisitions. These covenants, unless waived, may prevent us from pursuing acquisitions, significantly limit our operating and financial flexibility and limit our ability to respond to changes in our business or competitive activities. Our ability to comply with such provisions may be affected by events beyond our control. In the event of any default under our credit agreement, the credit agreement lenders may elect to declare all amounts borrowed under our credit agreement, together with accrued interest, to be due and payable. If we were unable to repay such borrowings, the credit agreement lenders could proceed against collateral securing the credit agreement, which consists of substantially all of our property and assets. Our credit agreement also contains a material adverse effect clause which may limit our ability to access additional funding under our credit agreement should a material adverse change in our business occur. Our leverage and debt service requirements may require us to adopt alternative business strategies . As of December 31, 2011 , we had $ 1435 million of debt outstanding, representing 20% of total capitalization. In addition, as discussed in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we entered into a distribution and development agreement with Musculoskeletal Tissue Foundation ( MTF ) on January 3, 2012 which we funded through additional borrowings under the revolving credit facility. See Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Liquidity and Capital Resources . The degree to which we are leveraged could have important consequences to investors, including but not limited to the following a portion of our cash flow from operations must be dedicated to debt service and will not be available for operations, capital expenditures, acquisitions, dividends and other purposes; our ability to obtain additional financing in the future for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or general corporate purposes may be limited or impaired, or may be at higher interest rates; we may be at a competitive disadvantage when compared to competitors that are less leveraged; we may be hindered in our ability to adjust rapidly to market conditions; our degree of leverage could make us more vulnerable in the event of a downturn in general economic conditions or other adverse circumstances applicable to us; and our interest expense could increase if interest rates in general increase because a portion of our borrowings, including our borrowings under our credit agreement, are and will continue to be at variable rates of interest. We may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service our indebtedness, which could require us to reduce our expenditures, sell assets, restructure our indebtedness or seek additional equity capital. Our ability to satisfy our obligations will depend upon our future operating performance, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. We may not have sufficient cash flow available to enable us to meet our obligations. If we are unable to service our indebtedness, we will be forced to adopt an alternative strategy that may include actions such as foregoing acquisitions, reducing or delaying capital expenditures, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our indebtedness or seeking additional equity capital. We cannot assure you that any of these strategies could be implemented on terms acceptable to us, if at all. See Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Liquidity and Capital Resources for a discussion of our indebtedness and its implications. We rely on a third party to obtain, process and distribute sports medicine allograft tissue. If such tissue cannot be obtained, is not accepted by the market or is not accepted under numerous government regulations, our results of operations could be negatively impacted. 20 As described in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, on January 3, 2012, we entered into an agreement with MTF to obtain MTF's worldwide promotion rights with respect to allograft tissues within the field of sports medicine. The supply of human tissue is dependent on donors and MTF has numerous relationships with donor groups. Likewise, the supply of tissues available for use as allografts depends on the continued successful processing of donated tissues by MTF at its processing facilities. We cannot be certain, however, that the supply of human tissue will continue to be available at current levels or will be of sufficiently high standards to meet the high processing standards maintained for such tissues by MTF, or in volumes sufficient to meet our customers' needs, or that MTF will be able to continue to process tissues to its high standards in volumes sufficient to keep pace with demand. We expect that the Company's share of revenue streams related to MTF's sports medicine allograft product line would decline in proportion to any decline or disruption in the supply of processed tissues. The FDA and several states have statutory authority to regulate allograft processing and allograft based materials. The FDA could identify deficiencies in future inspections of MTF or MTF's suppliers or promulgate future regulatory rulings that could disrupt our business, reducing profitability. If we infringe third parties patents, or if we lose our patents or they are held to be invalid, we could become subject to liability and our competitive position could be harmed. Much of the technology used in the markets in which we compete is covered by patents. We have numerous U.S. patents and corresponding foreign patents on products expiring at various dates from 2012 through 2030 and have additional patent applications pending. See Research and Development for a further description of our patents. The loss of our patents could reduce the value of the related products and any related competitive advantage. Competitors may also be able to design around our patents and to compete effectively with our products. In addition, the cost of enforcing our patents against third parties and defending our products against patent infringement actions by others could be substantial. We cannot assure you that pending patent applications will result in issued patents; patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged by competitors; our patents will be found to be valid or sufficiently broad to protect our technology or provide us with a competitive advantage; or we will be successful in defending against pending or future patent infringement claims asserted against our products. Ordering patterns of our customers may change resulting in reductions in sales . Our hospital and surgery center customers purchase our products in quantities sufficient to meet their anticipated demand. Likewise, our health care distributor customers purchase our products for ultimate resale to health care providers in quantities sufficient to meet the anticipated requirements of the distributors customers. Should inventories of our products owned by our hospital, surgery center and distributor customers grow to levels higher than their requirements, our customers may reduce the ordering of products from us. This could result in reduced sales during a financial accounting period. We can be sued for producing defective products and our insurance coverage may be insufficient to cover the nature and amount of any product liability claims . The nature of our products as medical devices and today litigious environment should be regarded as potential risks which could significantly and adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The insurance we maintain to protect against claims associated with the use of our products have deductibles and may not adequately cover the amount or nature of any claim asserted against us. We are also exposed to the risk that our insurers may become insolvent or that premiums may increase substantially. See Legal Proceedings for a further discussion of the risk of product liability actions and our insurance coverage. Damage to our physical properties as a result of windstorm, earthquake, fire or other natural or man made disaster may cause a financial loss and a loss of customers. Although we maintain insurance coverage for physical damage to our property and the resultant losses that could occur during a business interruption, we are required to pay deductibles and our insurance coverage is limited to certain caps. For example, our deductible for windstorm damage to our Florida property amounts to 2% of any loss and our deductible for 21 earthquake damage to our California properties is 5% of any loss. Further, while insurance reimburses us for our lost gross earnings during a business interruption, if we are unable to supply our customers with our products for an extended period of time, there can be no assurance that we will regain the customers business once the product supply is returned to normal. 22 Item 2 Item 2 Properties
