CIK: 8818
Company Name: AVERY DENNISON CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-02-27
Accession Number: 0001047469-13-001812


Item 1 BUSINESS. Company Background Avery Dennison Corporation ("Avery Dennison," the "Company," "Registrant," or "Issuer," and which may be referred to as "we" or "us") was incorporated in Delaware in 1977 as Avery International Corporation, the successor corporation to a California corporation of the same name that had been incorporated in 1946. In 1990, we merged 1 of our subsidiaries into Dennison Manufacturing Company ("Dennison"), as a result of which Dennison became our wholly owned subsidiary and in connection with which our name was changed to Avery Dennison Corporation. You can learn more about us by visiting our website at www.averydennison.com . Our website address provided in this Form 10 K is not intended to function as a hyperlink and the information on our website is not, nor should it be considered, part of this report or incorporated by reference in this report. Business Overview and Reportable Segments Our businesses include the production of pressure sensitive materials, and a variety of tickets, tags, labels other converted products, and office and consumer products. Some pressure sensitive materials are sold to label printers and converters that "convert" the materials into labels and other products through embossing, printing, stamping and die cutting. Some are sold by us in converted form as printable media, tapes and reflective sheeting. We also manufacture and sell a variety of office and consumer products, other converted products and Item not involving pressure sensitive comp1nts, such as binders, organizing systems, markers, fasteners and business forms, as well as tickets, tags, radio frequency identification ("RFID") inlays and tags, and imprinting equipment and related services for retailers and apparel manufacturers. Our reportable segments in 2012 were Pressure sensitive Materials; and Retail Branding and Information Solutions. In the fourth quarter of 2012, we realigned our segment reporting to reflect a new operating structure. This included the consolidation of certain operations, the streamlining of our corporate organization, and the realignment of organizational structures and accountabilities. These actions were reflected in the movement of Performance Tapes and RFID inlay manufacturing businesses from other specialty converting businesses into our reportable segments. Our Performance Tapes business is now included in the Pressure sensitive Materials ("PSM") segment, and our RFID inlay manufacturing business is now included in the Retail Branding and Information Solutions ("RBIS") segment. In addition, we adopted a new corporate expense allocation methodology whereby the allocation of corporate costs to the segments and other businesses was refined to better reflect costs required to support their respective operations. Under the new methodology, costs for which (i) a significant portion of the benefit derived from activity directly relates to operating unit performance, and (ii) the level of resourcing is impacted by operating unit decisions, are fully allocated to operations. All prior period amounts have been reclassified to reflect these changes. In addition to our reportable segments, we have other specialty converting businesses comprised of Vancive Medical Technologies ("Vancive") and Designed and Engineered Solutions ("DES"). In 2011, we entered into an agreement to sell our Office and Consumer Products ("OCP") business to 3M Company ("3M"). On October 3, 2012, we and 3M mutually agreed to terminate the agreement. On January 29, 2013, we entered into an agreement to sell our OCP and DES businesses to CCL Industries Inc. ("CCL") for a total purchase price of $500 million in cash, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the agreement. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals, and is expected to close in mid 2013 The operating results of the DES business, 1 Table of Contents reported in our other specialty converting businesses for all periods presented in this Form 10 K, are expected to be classified as discontinued operations beginning in the first quarter of 2013 The OCP business is reported as discontinued operations in this Form 10 K. In 2012, the PSM and RBIS segments contributed approximately 71% and 25%, of our total sales, respectively. In 2012, international operations constituted a substantial majority of our business, representing approximately 72% of our sales. As of December 29, 2012, we operated approximately 200 manufacturing and distribution facilities worldwide, employed approximately 30,000 persons, and had operations in over 50 countries. Pressure sensitive Materials Segment Our PSM segment manufactures and sells Fasson , JAC , and Avery Dennison brand pressure sensitive label and packaging materials, Avery and Avery Dennison brand graphics and graphic films, Avery Dennison brand reflective products, Avery Dennison brand tapes and performance polymers (largely used to manufacture pressure sensitive materials). The business of this segment tends not to be seasonal, except for certain outdoor graphics and reflective products and operations in Europe. Pressure sensitive materials consist primarily of papers, plastic films, metal foils and fabrics, which are coated with company developed and purchased adhesives, and then laminated with specially coated backing papers and films. They are sold in roll or sheet form with either solid or patterned adhesive coatings, and are available in a wide range of face materials, sizes, thicknesses and adhesive properties. These label and packaging materials are sold worldwide to label printers and converters for labeling, decorating, fastening, electronic data processing and special applications in the home and personal care, beer and beverage, durables, pharmaceutical, wine and spirits, and food market segments. A pressure sensitive, or self adhesive, material is 1 that adheres to a surface by press on contact. It generally consists of four elements a face material, which may be paper, metal foil, plastic film or fabric; an adhesive, which may be permanent or removable; a release coating; and a backing material to protect the adhesive against premature contact with other surfaces, which can also serve as the carrier for supporting and dispensing individual labels. When the products are to be used, the release coating and protective backing are removed, exposing the adhesive, and the label or other face material is pressed or rolled into place. Because self adhesive materials are easy to apply without the need for adhesive activation, the use of self adhesive materials can provide cost savings compared with other materials that require heat or moisture activated adhesives. When used in package decoration applications, the visual appeal of self adhesive materials helps foster increased sales of the product on which the materials are applied. Self adhesive materials provide consistent and versatile adhesion and are available in a large selection of materials in nearly any size, shape and color. Our graphics and reflective businesses sell a variety of films and other products to the architectural, commercial sign, digital printing, and other related market segments. We also sell durable cast and reflective films to the construction, automotive, and fleet transportation market segments; and reflective films for traffic and safety applications. We provide sign shops, commercial printers and designers a broad range of pressure sensitive materials to enable the creation of impactful and informative, brand and decorative graphics. We have an array of pressure sensitive vinyl and specialty materials designed for digital imaging, screen printing and sign cutting applications. Our performance tapes business manufactures and sells coated tapes and adhesive transfer tapes for use in non mechanical fastening, bonding and sealing systems in various industries. These tapes are sold to industrial original equipment manufacturers, converters, and disposable diaper producers worldwide in roll form and are available in a wide range of face materials, sizes, thicknesses and adhesive properties. 2 Table of Contents Performance polymer products include a range of solvent and emulsion based acrylic polymer adhesives, protective coatings and other polymer additives for internal use, as well as for sale to other companies. In the PSM segment, our larger competitors for our label and packaging materials business include Raflatac, a subsidiary of UPM Kymmene Corporation, MacTac, a division of Bemis Company, Ritrama, Inc., Flexcon Corporation, Inc., and various regional firms. For graphics and reflective products, our largest competitors are 3M and the Orafol Group. For performance tapes, our competitors include 3M, Tesa SE, and Nitto Denko Corporation. We believe that entry of competitors into the field of pressure sensitive adhesives and materials is limited by technical knowledge and capital requirements. We believe that our technical knowledge, relative size and scale of operations, ability to serve our customers with a broad line of quality products and service programs, distribution and brand strength, and development and commercialization of new products are among the more significant factors in maintaining and further developing our competitive position. Retail Branding and Information Solutions Segment Our RBIS segment designs, manufactures and sells a wide variety of branding and information solutions to retailers, brand owners, apparel manufacturers, distributors and industrial customers on a global basis. The business of this segment tends to be seasonal, with higher volume generally in advance of the fall (back to school), spring and holiday shipping periods. RBIS branding solutions include creative services, brand embellishments, graphic tickets, tags, and labels, and sustainable packaging. RBIS information solutions include RFID enabled inventory accuracy, visibility and loss prevention solutions, price ticketing and marking, care, content, and country or origin compliance solutions, and brand protection and security solutions. In the RBIS segment, our competitors include Checkpoint Systems, Inc., R pac Internation Corporation, and SML Group Limited. We believe that our global distribution ne2rk, reliable service, product quality and consistency and our ability to serve our customers consistently wherever they manufacture with comprehensive solutions are the key advantages in maintaining and further developing our competitive position. Other specialty converting businesses Other specialty converting businesses include our DES and Vancive businesses. These businesses manufacture and sell specialty tapes, highly engineered films, pressure sensitive postage stamps and other converted products. These businesses are generally not seasonal, except for certain automotive products due to plant shutdowns by automotive manufacturers. Our DES business manufactures custom pressure sensitive labels and multi layer film constructions for durable goods, electronics and consumer packaged goods. These products are sold primarily to original equipment manufacturers, tier suppliers and packaging converters. For the automotive market segment, the business manufactures custom pressure sensitive and heat seal labels, and pressure sensitive films, which are sold primarily to original equipment manufacturers and their suppliers. Businesses within our DES division include our performance films business, which produces a variety of decorative and functional films designed for injection mold applications that are sold primarily to the automotive industry, and specialty print receptive films to the industrial label market segment and proprietary wood grain and other patterns of film laminates for housing exteriors; our business media business, which designs and markets customized products for printing and information workflow applications; and our security printing business, which manufactures and sells self adhesive battery labels to a battery manufacturer and self adhesive stamps to the U.S. Postal Service. 3 Table of Contents Our Vancive business manufactures an array of pressure sensitive adhesive products for surgical, wound care, ostomy, and electromedical applications. These products are sold primarily to medical supply and device manufacturers and healthcare providers. We compete with a number of diverse businesses. We believe that entry of competitors into these specialty converting businesses is limited by capital and technical requirements. We believe that our ability to serve our customers with quality, cost effective products and newly developed and commercialized products are among the more significant factors in developing and maintaining our competitive position. Office and Consumer Products Our Office and Consumer Products business manufactures and sells a wide range of Avery branded printable media and other products. We develop, manufacture, source and sell a wide range of Avery branded products for office, school and home uses, including printable media, such as copier, ink jet and laser printer labels, related computer software, ink jet and laser printer card and index products, and organization, filing and presentation products, such as binders, dividers and sheet protectors. We also offer a wide range of other stati1ry products, including writing instruments, markers, adhesives and specialty products under brand names such as Avery , Marks A Lot and HI LITER . The array of our product offerings varies by geographic market. This business tends to be seasonal, with higher volume related to the back to school season. In addition, this business's sales are concentrated in a few major customers, primarily office products superstores, mass market retailers and wholesalers. The loss of 1 or more of these customers could have a material adverse effect on the business's financial results. In this business, our larger competitors include 3M, Acco Brands Corporation, Esselte Corporation and private label brands. We believe that the more significant factors in maintaining and further developing our competitive position include our brand strength, customer relationships, service excellence, large installed base of software that facilitates the use of many of our products, ability to serve our customers with a broad line of quality products, and development and commercialization of new products. Segment Financial Information Certain financial information on our reporting segments and other specialty converting businesses for fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 appears in Note 12, "Segment Information," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in our 2012 Annual Report to Shareholders (our "2012 Annual Report") and is incorporated herein by reference. Foreign Operations Certain financial information about our geographic areas for fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 appears in Note 12, "Segment Information," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in our 2012 Annual Report and is incorporated herein by reference. Working Capital Certain financial information about our working capital for fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 appears in the "Financial Condition" section of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2012 Annual Report and is incorporated herein by reference. Research and Development Many of our current products are the result of our research and development efforts. Our research efforts are directed primarily toward developing new products and operating techniques and improving product performance, often in close association with customers. These efforts also include patent and product development work, and focus on improving adhesives, materials and coating processes, as well as 4 Table of Contents related product applications and ventures. In addition, these efforts often focus on projects relating to printing and coating technologies, as well as adhesive, release and ink chemistries. Our expenses for research and development were $105.1 million in 2012, $96.2 million in 2011, and $88.4 million in 2010. Patents, Trademarks and Licenses The loss of individual patents or licenses would not be material to us taken as a whole, nor to our operating segments individually. Our principal trademarks are Avery Dennison, our logo, Fasson and Avery. We believe these trademarks are significantly strong in the market segments in which our products compete. Manufacturing and Environmental Matters We use various raw materials, primarily paper, plastic films and resins, as well as specialty chemicals purchased from various commercial and industrial sources, which are subject to price fluctuations. Although shortages can occur from time to time, these raw materials are generally available. We produce a majority of our self adhesive materials using water based emulsion and hot melt adhesive technologies. Emissions from these operations contain small amounts of volatile organic compounds, which are regulated by agencies of federal, state, local and foreign governments. We continue to evaluate the use of alternative materials and technologies to minimize these emissions. A portion of our manufacturing process for self adhesive materials utilizes certain organic solvents which, unless controlled, could be emitted into the atmosphere. Emissions of these substances are regulated by agencies of federal, state, local and foreign governments. In connection with the maintenance and acquisition of certain manufacturing equipment, we invest in solvent capture and control units to assist in regulating these emissions. We have developed adhesives and adhesive processing systems that minimize the use of solvents. Emulsion adhesives, hot melt adhesives, and solventless and emulsion silic1 systems have been installed in many of our facilities. Based on current information, we do not believe that the cost of complying with applicable laws regulating the discharge of materials into the environment, or otherwise relating to the protection of the environment, will have a material effect upon our capital expenditures, consolidated financial position or results of operations. For information regarding our potential responsibility for cleanup costs at certain hazardous waste sites, see "Legal Proceedings" (, Item 3) and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" (I, Item 7). Available Information Our Annual Reports on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed with, or furnished to, the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available free of charge in the "Investors" section of our website at www.averydennison.com as soon as reasonably practicable after electronic filing with or furnishing to the SEC. We also make available on our website our (i) Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, (ii) Amended and Restated Bylaws, (iii) Corporate Governance Guidelines, (iv) Code of Conduct, which applies to our directors, officers and employees, (v) Code of Ethics for the Chief Executive Officer and Senior Financial Officers, (vi) the charters of the Audit, Compensation and Executive Personnel, and Governance and Social Responsibility Committees of our Board of Directors, and (vii) Audit Committee Complaint Procedures for Accounting and Auditing Matters. These documents are also available free of charge in print to stockholders who request them by writing to Secretary, Avery Dennison Corporation, 150 North Orange Grove Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91103 5 Table of Contents Item 1A. RISK FACTORS. The risks described above are not exhaustive. If any of the above risks actually occur, our business, including our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition, could suffer, which might cause the value of our securities to decline. Our ability to attain our goals and objectives is materially dependent on numerous factors and risks, including but not limited to, the following The demand for our products is impacted by the effects of, and changes in, worldwide conditions, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. In 2012, approximately 72% of our sales were from international operations. We have operations in over 50 countries and our domestic and international operations are strongly influenced by matters beyond our control, including changes in political, social, economic and labor conditions, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and international trade regulations (including tariffs), as well as the impact of these changes on the underlying demand for our products. A decline in economic activity in the United States and other regions of the world could result in a material adverse effect on our business, including, among other things, reduced consumer spending, declines in asset valuations, diminished liquidity and credit availability, significant volatility in securities prices, credit rating downgrades, and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Declines in economic conditions in the United States, Europe, and Asia could adversely affect our customers, suppliers and businesses similar to ours. These declines could result in a variety of negative effects, including lower revenues, increased costs, lower gross margin percentages, increased allowances for doubtful accounts and or write offs of accounts receivable, and required recognition of impairments of capitalized assets, including goodwill and other intangibles. A decline in economic conditions, including the ongoing macroeconomic challenges in the United States and Europe and the debt crisis in certain countries in the European Union, could also have other material adverse effects on our business. We are not able to predict the duration and severity of adverse economic conditions in the U.S. and other countries. We are affected by competitive conditions and customer preferences. If we do not compete effectively, we could lose market share or reduce selling prices, adversely affecting our business. We are at risk that our competitors will expand in our key market segments and implement new technologies, enhancing their competitive position relative to ours. Competitors also may be able to offer additional products, services, lower prices, or other incentives that we cannot or would not offer or that would make our products less profitable. There can be no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully against current and future competitors. We also are at risk with regard to changes in customer order patterns, such as changes in the levels of inventory maintained by customers and the timing of customer purchases, which may be affected by announced price changes, changes in our incentive programs, or changes in the customer's ability to achieve incentive goals. Changes in customers' preferences for our products can also affect the demand for our products. Decline in demand for our products could have a material adverse effect on our business. As a manufacturer, our sales and profitability are dependent upon the cost and availability of raw materials and energy, which are subject to price fluctuations, and our ability to control or pass on costs of raw materials and labor. Raw material cost increases could adversely affect our business. The pricing environment for raw materials used in our businesses could become challenging and volatile. Additionally, energy costs remain volatile and unpredictable. Inflationary and other increases in the costs of raw materials, labor and energy have occurred in the past, most recently in 2010 and 2011, and could recur. In addition, rules adopted by the SEC pursuant to Section 1502 of the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requiring disclosure concerning the use of certain minerals that are mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo and adjoining countries ("Conflict Mineral Rules") could 6 Table of Contents adversely affect the sourcing, supply and pricing of materials used in our products, particularly if the number of suppliers offering the minerals identified as "conflict free" is limited. Our performance depends in part on our ability to pass on these cost increases to customers by raising the selling prices for our products and by improving productivity. Depending on market dynamics and the terms of customer contracts, our ability to recover these costs through increased pricing may be limited. Also, it is important for us to obtain timely delivery of materials, equipment, and other resources from suppliers, and to make timely delivery to customers. It is possible that any of our supplier relationships could be interrupted due to natural and other disasters or other events, or be terminated in the future. A disruption to our supply chain could adversely affect our sales and profitability, and any sustained interruption in our receipt of adequate supplies could have a material adverse effect on our business. Our future profitability may be adversely affected if we generate less productivity improvement than projected. We intend to continue efforts to reduce costs in many of our operations, including through facility closures and square footage reductions, headcount reductions, organizational restructuring, process standardization, and manufacturing relocation. However, the success of these efforts is not assured and lower levels of productivity could reduce profitability. In addition, cost reduction actions could expose us to production risk, loss of sales and employee turnover. Foreign currency exchange rates, and fluctuations in those rates, may affect our reported sales and profitability. Fluctuations in currencies can cause transaction, translation and other losses, which could negatively impact our sales and profitability. Margins on sales of our products in foreign countries could be materially and adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. We monitor our foreign currency exposures and may, from time to time, use hedging instruments to mitigate exposure to changes in foreign currencies. Hedging activities may only offset a portion of the adverse financial effects of unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates over the limited time the hedges are in place. Additionally, there are ongoing concerns regarding the short and long term stability of the euro and its ability to serve as a single currency for a variety of individual countries. These concerns could lead individual countries to revert, or threaten to revert, to their former local currencies, which could lead to the dislocation or dissolution of the euro. If this were to occur, the assets we hold in a country that re introduces its local currency could be significantly devalued. Furthermore, the dislocation or dissolution of the euro could cause significant volatility and disruption in the global economy, which could adversely impact our business, including the availability and cost of supplies and materials, the demand and pricing strategy for our products given the introduction of additional currencies, and our ability to obtain financing at reasonable costs. Finally, if it were to become necessary for us to conduct business in additional currencies, we could be subject to additional earnings volatility as amounts in these currencies are translated into U.S. dollars. There can be no assurances that we will be able to divest the OCP and DES businesses. Although we have entered into an agreement to sell the OCP and DES businesses, there can be no assurances that we will be able to complete the divestiture transaction in a timely manner or at all, which could adversely affect our business. Delays in segregating these businesses or failure to obtain regulatory approvals or satisfy other closing requirements could result in substantial additional costs or could unfavorably affect the ultimate value of the sale. In addition, we may be unable to realize any economic or tax benefits from the transaction, which could unfavorably affect the ultimate value of the sale. If a sale is consummated, the provision of transition services may disrupt our ongoing business, distract management, divert resources and create challenges in maintaining our current customer service levels. We may not successfully manage these or other risks we may confront in divesting these businesses, which could have an adverse effect on our business. 7 Table of Contents We have acquired companies and may continue to acquire other companies. Acquisitions come with significant risks and uncertainties, including those related to integration, technology and personnel. To grow our product lines and expand into new markets, we have made acquisitions in the past and may do so in the future. Various risks, uncertainties, and costs are associated with acquisitions. Effective integration of systems, controls, objectives, personnel, product lines, market segments, customers, suppliers, and production facilities and cost savings can be difficult to achieve, and the results of integration actions are uncertain, particularly given our geographically dispersed organization. In addition, we may not be able to retain key personnel of an acquired company and we may not be able to successfully execute integration strategies or achieve projected performance targets for the business segment into which an acquired company is integrated. Both before and after the closing of an acquisition, our business and those of the acquired company or companies may suffer due to uncertainty or diversion of management attention. There can be no assurance that any acquisitions will be successful and contribute to our profitability and we may not be able to identify new acquisition opportunities in the future. Divestures of any of our businesses or product lines could have a material adverse effect on our business. We continually evaluate the performance of our businesses and may determine to sell a business or product line. Divestures may result in significant write offs or impairments of assets, including goodwill and other intangible assets. Divestitures may involve additional risks, including separation of operations, products and personnel, diversion of management attention, disruption to our other businesses and loss of key employees. We may not successfully manage these or other risks we may confront in divesting a business or product line, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Our customer base is diversified, but in a portion of our business, industry concentration has increased the importance, and decreased the number, of significant customers. Sales of our OCP business in the United States are concentrated in a few major customers, principally office product superstores, mass market distributors and wholesalers. If we are unable to divest this business, the business risk associated with this concentration, including increased credit risks for these and other customers, and the possibility of related bad debt write offs, could negatively affect the business's margins and profits. Possible increased difficulty in the collection of receivables as a result of economic conditions or other market factors could have a material adverse effect on our business. Although we have processes to administer credit granted to customers and believe our allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate, we have experienced, and in the future may experience, losses as a result of our inability to collect certain accounts receivable. The financial difficulties of a customer could result in reduced business with that customer. We may also assume higher credit risk relating to receivables of a customer experiencing financial difficulty. If these developments occur, our inability to shift sales to other customers or to collect on our accounts receivable from major customers could substantially reduce our income and have a material adverse effect on our business. Our inability to develop and successfully market new products and applications could compromise our competitive position. The timely introduction of new products and improvements in current products helps determine our success. Research and development is complex and uncertain and requires innovation and anticipation of market trends. We could focus on products that ultimately are not accepted by customers or we could suffer delays in production or launch of new products that could compromise our competitive position. 8 Table of Contents We are subject to risks associated with the availability and coverage of various types of insurance. We have various types of insurance, including property, workers' compensation, general liability, and environmental liability. Insurance costs can be unpredictable and may adversely impact our business. We retain some portion of our insurable risks, and therefore, unforeseen or catastrophic losses in excess of insured limits could have a material adverse effect on our business. Changes in our tax rates could affect our future results. Our future effective tax rate could be affected by changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, or changes in tax laws and regulations or their interpretation. We are subject to the regular examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these examinations will not have a material adverse effect on our business. The amount of various taxes we pay is subject to ongoing compliance requirements and audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. Our estimate of the potential outcome of uncertain tax issues is subject to our assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. We use these assessments to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes and other tax related accounts. Our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities in the period the assessments are made or resolved, which may materially impact our effective tax rate and or our financial results. We have deferred tax assets that we may not be able to realize under certain circumstances. If we are unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain jurisdictions, or if there is a significant change in the time period within which the underlying temporary differences become taxable or deductible, we could be required to increase our valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets. This would result in an increase in our effective tax rate and could have a material adverse effect on our future results. In addition, changes in statutory tax rates may change our deferred tax asset or liability balances, with either a favorable or an unfavorable impact on our effective tax rate. The computation and assessment of realizability of our deferred tax assets may also be materially impacted by new legislation or regulations. Potential tax liabilities and proposed changes in U.S. tax legislation could materially impact our business. Currently, the majority of our revenue is generated from customers located outside of the U.S., and a substantial portion of our assets and our employees are located outside of the U.S. We have not accrued income taxes and foreign withholding taxes on unrepatriated earnings for most non U.S. subsidiaries, because those earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested in the operations of those subsidiaries. Our results of operations and cash flows from operating activities may be materially and adversely affected if tax rules regarding unrepatriated earnings change, if changes in our domestic cash needs require us to repatriate foreign earnings for which no tax provisions have been made, or if the U. S. international tax rules change as part of comprehensive tax reform or other tax legislation. For us to remain competitive, it is important to recruit and retain highly skilled employees. We also utilize various outsourcing arrangements for certain services, and related delays, resource availability, or errors by these service providers may lead to increased costs or disruption in our business. There is significant competition to recruit and retain skilled employees. Due to expansion in certain markets and our ongoing productivity efforts and recent employee reductions, it may be difficult for us to recruit and retain sufficient numbers of highly skilled employees. 9 Table of Contents In addition, we have outsourced certain services to third party service providers, and may outsource other services in the future to achieve cost savings and operating efficiencies. Service provider delays, resource availability, business issues or errors may lead to disruption in our businesses and or increased costs. If we do not effectively develop, implement and manage outsourcing strategies, if third party providers do not perform effectively and in a timely manner, or if we experience problems with transitioning work to a third party, we may not be able to achieve our expected cost savings, and may experience delays or incur additional costs to correct errors made by these service providers. Significant disruption to our information technology infrastructure could adversely impact our business. We rely on the efficient and uninterrupted operation of a large and complex information technology infrastructure to link our worldwide divisions. Like other information technology systems, ours is susceptible to a number of factors including, but not limited to, damage or interruptions resulting from a variety of causes such as obsolescence, natural disasters, power failures, human error, viruses and data security breaches. We upgrade and install new systems, which, if installed or programmed incorrectly or on a delayed timeframe, could cause delays or cancellations of customer orders, impede the manufacture or shipment of products, or disrupt the processing of transactions. We have implemented certain measures to reduce our risk related to system and ne2rk disruptions, but if a disruption were to occur, we could incur significant losses and remediation costs. We maintain information necessary to conduct our business, including confidential and proprietary information as well as personal information regarding our customers and employees, in digital form. Data maintained in digital form is subject to the risk of intrusion, tampering and theft. We develop and maintain systems to prevent this from occurring, but the development and maintenance of these systems is costly and requires ongoing monitoring and updating as technologies change and efforts to overcome security measures become more sophisticated. Moreover, despite our efforts, the possibility of intrusion, tampering and theft cannot be eliminated entirely. In addition, we provide confidential, proprietary and personal information to third parties when it is necessary to pursue business objectives. While we obtain assurances that these third parties will protect this information and, where appropriate, assess the protections employed by these third parties, there is a risk the confidentiality of data held by third parties may be compromised. If our data systems are compromised, our ability to conduct business may be impaired, we may lose profitable opportunities or the value of those opportunities may be diminished and we may lose revenue as a result of unlicensed use of our intellectual property. If personal information of our customers or employees were misappropriated, our reputation with our customers and employees could be injured resulting in loss of business or morale, and we could incur costs to remediate possible injury to our customers and employees or to pay fines or take other action with respect to judicial or regulatory actions arising out of any such incident. Additionally, we rely on services provided by third party vendors for a significant portion of our information technology support, development and implementation, which may make our operations vulnerable to these vendors' failure to perform adequately. Miscalculation of our infrastructure needs could adversely impact our business. Projected requirements of our infrastructure investments may differ from actual levels if our volume growth is not as we anticipate. Our infrastructure investments generally are long term in nature, and it is possible that these investments may not generate our expected return due to changes in the marketplace, failures to complete implementation, or other factors. Significant changes from our expected need for and or returns on infrastructure investments could adversely affect our business. 10 Table of Contents Our reputation, sales, and earnings could be affected adversely if the quality of our products and services does not meet customer expectations. There are occasions when we manufacture products with quality issues resulting from defective materials, manufacturing, packaging or design. Many of these issues are discovered before shipping, causing delays in shipping, delays in the manufacturing process, and occasionally cancelled orders. When issues are discovered after shipment, they may result in additional shipping costs, discounts, refunds, and loss of future sales. Both pre shipping and post shipping quality issues could adversely impact our business and negatively impact our reputation. Because our products are sold by third parties, our business depends in part on the financial health of these parties. Our products are not sold only by us, but by third party distributors and retailers as well. Some of our distributors also market products that compete with our products. Changes in the financial or business conditions or the purchasing decisions of these third parties or their customers could affect our business. We outsource some of our manufacturing. If there are significant changes in the quality control or financial or business condition of these outsourced manufacturers, our business could be negatively impacted. We manufacture most of our products, but we also use third party manufacturers, for example, for specialty jobs or capacity overflow. Outsourced manufacturers reduce our ability to prevent product quality issues, late deliveries, customer dissatisfaction and compliance with customer requirements for labor standards. Because of possible quality issues and customer dissatisfaction, deficiencies in the performance of outsourced manufacturers could have a material adverse effect on our business. Changes in our business strategies may increase our costs and could affect the profitability of our businesses. As changes in our business environment occur, we may need to adjust our business strategies or restructure our operations or particular businesses. When these changes occur, we may incur costs to change our business strategy and may need to write down the value of selected assets. We also may need to invest in new businesses that have short term returns that are negative or low and whose ultimate business prospects are uncertain. If any of these events were to occur, our costs could increase, our assets could be impaired, or our returns on new investments could be lower than prior to the change in strategy. If our indebtedness increases significantly or our credit ratings are downgraded, we may have difficulty obtaining acceptable short and long term financing. Our overall level of indebtedness and credit ratings are significant factors in our ability to raise short term and long term financing. Higher debt levels could negatively impact our ability to meet other business needs or opportunities and could result in higher financing costs. The credit ratings assigned to us also impact the interest rates on our commercial paper and other borrowings. If our credit ratings were to be downgraded, our financial flexibility could decrease and the cost to borrow would increase. At December 29, 2012, our variable rate borrowings were $268.1 million. Fluctuations in interest rates can increase borrowing costs and have a material adverse impact on our business. Our current and future debt covenants may limit our flexibility. Our credit facilities and the indentures governing our notes contain, and any future indebtedness of ours would likely contain, restrictive covenants that impose operating and financial restrictions on us. The restrictive covenants in our existing debt agreements and any future financing agreements may adversely affect our ability to engage in certain business activities that would otherwise be in our best long term interests. 11 Table of Contents Additional financings may dilute the holdings of our current shareholders. In order to provide capital for the operation of our business, we may enter into additional financing arrangements. These arrangements may involve the issuance of new shares of preferred or common stock, convertible debt securities and or warrants. Any of these Item could result in a material increase in the number of shares of common stock outstanding, which would in turn result in a dilution of the ownership interests of existing common shareholders. In addition, these new securities could contain provisions, such as priorities on distributions and voting rights, that could affect the value of our existing common stock. The level of returns on pension and postretirement plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for valuation purposes could affect our earnings and cash flows in future periods. Changes in accounting standards and government regulations could also affect our pension and postretirement plan expense and funding requirements. Assumptions used in determining projected benefit obligations and the fair value of plan assets for our pension plan and other postretirement benefit plans are evaluated by us in consultation with outside actuaries. In the event that we were to determine that changes are warranted in the assumptions used, such as the discount rate, expected long term rate of return, or health care costs, our future pension and projected postretirement benefit expenses and funding requirements could increase or decrease. Because of changing market conditions or changes in the participant population, the actuarial assumptions that we use may differ from actual results, which could have a significant impact on our pension and postretirement liability and related costs. Funding obligations are determined based on the value of assets and liabilities on a specific date as required under relevant government regulations for each plan. Future pension funding requirements, and the timing of funding payments, could be affected by future legislation or regulation. Our pension assets are significant and subject to market, interest and credit risk that may reduce their value. Changes in the value of our pension assets could materially adversely affect our earnings and cash flows. In particular, the value of our investments may decline due to increases in interest rates or volatility in the financial markets. Although we mitigate these risks by investing in high quality securities, ensuring adequate diversification of our investment portfolio and monitoring our portfolio's overall risk profile, the value of our investments may nevertheless decline. Our share price may be volatile. Changes in our stock price may affect our access to, or cost of financing from, capital markets and may affect our stock based compensation arrangements, among other things. Our stock price, which has at times experienced substantial volatility, is influenced by changes in the overall stock market and demand for equity securities in general. Other factors, including our financial performance, on a standal1 basis and relative to our peers and competitors, and market expectations for our future performance, the level of perceived growth of our industries, and other company specific factors, can also materially impact our share price. There can be no assurance that our stock price will be less volatile in the future. An impairment in the carrying value of goodwill could negatively impact our results of operations and net worth. Goodwill is initially recorded at fair value and is not amortized, but is reviewed for impairment annually (or more frequently, if impairment indicators are present). We review goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. In assessing fair value, we make estimates and assumptions about sales, operating margins, growth rates, and discount rates based on our business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and marketplace data. There are inherent uncertainties related to these factors and management's judgment in applying these factors. Goodwill valuations have been calculated using an income approach based on the present value of future cash flows of each reporting unit. 12 Table of Contents We could be required to evaluate the carrying value of goodwill prior to the annual assessment if we experience disruptions to the business, unexpected significant declines in operating results, divestiture of a significant comp1nt of our business or sustained market capitalization declines. These types of events and the resulting analyses resulted in a significant goodwill impairment charge in 2009 related to our RBIS segment and could result in other goodwill impairment charges in the future. Impairment charges could substantially affect our business in the periods of such charges, as did the 1 in 2009. Potential adverse developments in legal proceedings, investigations and other legal, compliance and regulatory matters, including those involving product and trade compliance, and other matters, could impact us materially. Our financial results could be materially and adversely impacted by an unfavorable outcome to pending or future litigation and investigations, and other legal, compliance and regulatory matters, including, but not limited to, product and trade compliance and other matters. See "Legal Proceedings" (, Item 3). For example, the new requirements set forth in the Conflict Mineral Rules will require due diligence efforts during 2013, with initial disclosure requirements beginning in May 2014. We expect to incur costs associated with complying with these disclosure requirements, including for conducting diligence procedures to determine the sources of conflict minerals that may be used or necessary to the production of our products and, if applicable, potential changes to products, processes or sources of supply as a consequence of such verification activities. Our reputation may be harmed if we are not able to sufficiently verify the origins for these minerals and metals used in our products through the due diligence procedures that we implement. There can be no assurance that any investigation or litigation outcome will be favorable. We need to comply with numerous environmental, health, and safety laws. The costs of complying with these laws could adversely impact our business. Due to the nature of our business, we are subject to environmental, health, and safety laws and regulations, including those related to the disposal of hazardous waste from our manufacturing processes. Compliance with existing and future environmental, health and safety laws could subject us to future costs or liabilities; impact our production capabilities; limit our ability to sell, expand or acquire facilities; and generally impact our business. We have accrued liabilities for environmental clean up sites, including sites for which governmental agencies have designated us as a potentially responsible party, where it is probable that a loss will be incurred and the cost or amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. See "Legal Proceedings" (, Item 3). However, because of the uncertainties associated with environmental assessment and remediation activities, future expense to remediate currently identified sites and other sites that could be identified for cleanup in the future, could be higher than the liabilities accrued. We are required to comply with anti corruption laws and regulations of the U.S. government and various international jurisdictions, and our failure to comply with these laws and regulations could have a material adverse impact on our business. Due to the international nature of our business, we are required to comply with the anti corruption laws and regulations of the U.S. government and various international jurisdictions, such as the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the United Kingdom's Bribery Act of 2010, and our failure to comply with these rules and regulations could expose us to liabilities. Infringing intellectual property rights of third parties or inadequately acquiring or protecting our intellectual property could harm our ability to compete or grow. Because our products involve complex technology and chemistry, we are involved from time to time in litigation involving patents and other intellectual property. Parties have filed, and in the future may file, claims against us alleging that we have infringed their intellectual property rights. If we are held liable for 13 Table of Contents infringement, we could be required to pay damages, obtain licenses or cease making or selling certain products. There can be no assurance that licenses will be available on commercially reasonable terms or will be available at all. The defense of these claims, whether or not meritorious, and the development of new technology could cause us to incur significant costs and divert the attention of management. We also have valuable intellectual property upon which third parties may infringe. We attempt to protect and restrict access to our intellectual property and proprietary information by relying on the patent, trademark, copyright and trade secret laws of the U.S. and other countries, as well as non disclosure agreements. However, it may be possible for a third party to obtain our information without our authorization, independently develop similar technologies, or breach a non disclosure agreement entered into with us. In addition, many of the countries in which we operate do not have intellectual property laws that protect proprietary rights as fully as do laws in the U.S. The use of our intellectual property by some1 else without our authorization could reduce or eliminate certain competitive advantages we have, cause us to lose sales or otherwise harm our business. Further, the costs associated with protecting our intellectual property rights could adversely impact our business. We have obtained and applied for U.S. and foreign trademark registrations and patents, and will continue to evaluate whether to register additional trademarks and seek patents as appropriate. We cannot guarantee that any of the pending applications will be approved by the applicable government authorities. Further, we cannot assure that the validity of our patents or our trademarks will not be challenged. In addition, third parties may be able to develop competing products using technology that avoids our patents. Healthcare reform legislation could have a material adverse impact on our business. During 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 were signed into law in the United States. Certain of the provisions that could most significantly increase our healthcare costs in the near term include the removal of annual plan limits, the changes in rules regarding eligibility for dependents and the mandate that health plans cover 100% of preventative care. In addition, our healthcare costs could increase if the new legislation and accompanying regulations require us to cover more employees than we do currently or pay penalty amounts in the event that employees do not elect our offered coverage. While much of the cost of the enacted healthcare legislation is expected to occur in or after 2014 due to provisions of the legislation being phased in over time, changes to our healthcare cost structure could have a material adverse impact on our business. Item 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. N1 Item 2 PROPERTIES. 
