CIK: 892160
Company Name: DERMA SCIENCES INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2014-03-13
Accession Number: 0001144204-14-015526


Item 1 Business Overview Derma Sciences, Inc. ( Derma Sciences ) and its subsidiaries Sunshine Products, Inc., Derma Sciences Canada Inc., Derma First Aid Products, Inc., MedEfficiency, Inc. and Derma Sciences Europe LTD are referred to collectively as we, our, us and the Company. Our executive offices are located at 214 Carnegie Center, Suite 300, Princeton, New Jersey 08540. Derma Sciences was incorporated under the laws of Colorado on September 10, 1984. On June 3, 1996, we changed our state of domicile to Pennsylvania and on September 14, 2012, we changed our state of domicile to Delaware. Derma Sciences is a tissue regeneration company focused on 3 segments of the wound care marketplace pharmaceutical wound care, advanced wound care and traditional wound care products. Our strategic objectives are to grow the Company by continuing to progress the development of DSC127, our angiotensin analog pharmaceutical compound with an initial indication for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers, growing and expanding our existing line of novel advanced wound care products and managing our traditional wound care products to sustain and grow this line where possible, while deploying the appropriate amount of human and financial resources available. The Company maintains manufacturing facilities in Toronto, Canada and Nantong, China and a well established ne2rk of third party suppliers for its products. The majority of our products are sold through distributors to various health care providers such as wound care centers, extended care facilities, acute care facilities, home health care agencies and physicians offices. Certain products are sold directly to care givers and through retail channels. The Company markets its products principally through direct sales representatives in the United States (the U.S. ), Canada and the United Kingdom (the U.K. ), and through independent distributors within other select international markets. Products Pharmaceutical Wound Care In 2013, we commenced a Phase 3 clinical trial for DSC127, an angiotensin analog licensed from the University of Southern California for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. The compound has been shown to improve epithelialization, granulation and vascularization, accelerating wound healing in a variety of normal and diabetic models. This finding suggests that DSC127 produces different actions at the wound site during various stages of healing. DSC127 has successfully completed a Phase 1 study in healthy volunteers and a Phase 2 study on patients with diabetic foot ulcers. Full results of the study were published by a major international advanced wound care journal in July 2012 (Wound Repair and Regeneration 20482 490). There were no safety concerns observed in the preclinical, Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials of DSC127 for diabetic foot ulcers. The Phase 3 clinical trial for diabetic foot ulcers is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. If successful, New Drug Application ( NDA ) approval by the U.S. Food and Drug administration ( FDA ) would be expected in 2017. Beyond the initial indication for diabetic foot ulcers, we have begun preclinical testing for scar reduction. We anticipate having the results of this study in the second half of 2014. In addition, we are presently evaluating the feasibility of initiating clinical testing for radiation dermatitis using this angiotensin analog. Testing has been ongoing since 2011 for the treatment and or prevention of tissue damage related to radiation exposure as a result of a nuclear attack. A grant for up to $14 million was made available for this testing by Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority ("BARDA") to our development partners, US Biotest, the inventors of the angiotensin analog. 3 Pending NDA approval for each respective indication, the potential markets for this compound include (1) the $10 billion chronic wound market; (2) the $8 billion scar prevention reduction market; (3) the $6 billion burn market; and (4) the $6 billion radiation and other wound markets. Advanced Wound Care Our advanced wound care product line consists of the following MEDIH1Y offers a line of patented dressings, comprised of a high percentage of Active Leptospermum H1y. This unique type of h1y has been shown in scientific studies to have antimicrobial, anti inflammatory and immune modulatory activities. MEDIH1Y dressings are ideal for the management of non chronic and hard to heal wounds including chronic ulcers, burns and post operative wounds. The dressings are non toxic and have been shown in a large scale, randomized controlled study to promote healing. TCC EZ is a patented market leading off loading system for patients with diabetic foot ulcers. Total contact casting (TCC) has been shown in multiple randomized controlled studies to achieve 89% healing rates. However, traditional TCC is utilized in a small percentage of cases (< 5%) due to various factors, such as long application times, frequency of application error and patient dissatisfaction as a result of the heavy nature of the cast. TCC EZ virtually eliminates these issues as it can be applied in less than 1 third the time of a traditional TCC. TCC EZ allows for a much more simplified process, so application errors are uncommon, and the cast itself is significantly lighter than a traditional TCC cast, due to its open weave pattern. AMNIOEXCEL and AMNIOMATRIX represent our entry into the $500 million skin substitute market. Licensed in January 2014, we will introduce these products by the third quarter of 2014. AMNIOEXCEL is an amniotic extracellular membrane product that is a sterile, room temperature stable, re absorbable tissue allograft derived from human amnion, providing a natural scaffold for tissue repair and regeneration. AMNIOMATRIX is a cryopreserved liquid allograft derived from human placenta tissue used as a wound covering in the treatment of localized tissue defects. The addressable skin substitute market includes traumatic injuries, burns, surgical wounds, complex chronic and acute wounds and other soft tissue defects. XTRASORB provides a novel, proprietary line of dressings that utilizes super absorbent polymer technologies. While other absorbing dressings currently on the market use open cell structures to capture fluid, XTRASORB dressings convert fluid within the dressings to a gel, thus locking the exudates into the dressings. XTRASORB dressings have a distinct advantage over alternative products due to their ability to absorb more fluid and segregate the fluid from the wound, thus avoiding further wound deterioration. Studies have shown these dressings are able to reduce wound exposure to harmful and damaging matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP ). These dressings can absorb up to 20 times their weight in wound fluid and compare favorably to the market leading dressings at a cost effective price point. BIOGUARD is a line of patented first and secondary dressings containing an active antimicrobial compound. This compound, a cationic biocide, is intrinsically bound to the dressing through a proprietary process that results in the inability for the compound to separate from the dressing. These dressings are ideal for prophylactic use in the prevention of hospital or community acquired infections through wound sites, especially for burns. The dressings have been shown to kill 99.9% of virulent bacteria such as methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in less than 1 minute, and 99.999% of MRSA in less than 1 hour. Other advanced wound care products include ALGICELL AG, a proprietary antimicrobial dressing with ionic silver as its active ingredient; and a range of moist, occlusive dressings such as hydrocolloids, foams, hydrogels, alginates, additional silver antimicrobial dressings, cleansers and our proprietary DERMAGRAN products. Our advanced wound care products are the main focus of our sales and marketing resources. Our promoted advanced wound care products are differentiated in the marketplace and carry higher gross profit margins. We continue to evaluate synergistic products and technologies within the advanced wound care market for consideration in the expansion of our advanced wound care product line. 4 Traditional Wound Care Our traditional wound care product line consists of the following A broad line of branded gauze sponges and bandages, non adherent impregnated dressings, retention devices, paste bandages and other compression devices for the medical markets; A broad line of branded and private label adhesive bandages and related first aid products for the medical, industrial, private label and retail markets; Private label wound care products utilizing our manufacturing capabilities for a number of U. S. and international health care companies; A line of rigid and proprietary flexible wound closure strips, nasal tube fasteners and a variety of catheter fasteners for the medical markets; and A line of general purpose and specialized skin care products for the institutional medical market. Our traditional wound care products for the most part are not differentiated in the marketplace and carry lower gross profit margins. We sell these products principally through distributors or, in the case of private label products, directly to customers on the basis of quality, price and customer service. At times, we have the opportunity to bundle these products with the sale of our advanced wound care products. As such, this product line does not require a significant investment in sales and marketing resources to sustain it. To the extent opportunities for growth are available, we will invest accordingly. Sales and Marketing Our sales and marketing infrastructure is divided into 2 groups, Advanced Wound Care and Traditional Wound Care. The Advanced Wound Care group is comprised of the group president and the sales and marketing infrastructure that supports the global sale of our advanced wound care products. This infrastructure includes the Company global advanced wound care marketing, clinical, product development and sales organizations. The advanced wound care group principal objective is to create care giver demand for our products. The Traditional Wound Care group is comprised of the group president and the global marketing and sales infrastructure that support the global sale of our traditional wound care products. This infrastructure includes the global commodity wound care, first aid products and contract manufacturing marketing and sales organizations, together with the corporate accounts team that supports both groups. The traditional wound care group principal objective is to create distributor and private label demand for our products. Marketing Our advanced wound care global marketing team is comprised of a vice president, four product managers and 2 graphic artists at corporate headquarters. While the majority of this teams time is spent supporting the U.S. market, they are also responsible for supporting our rest of world marketing efforts by working closely with local management. Our traditional wound care marketing efforts consist principally of direct expenses in support of the business. These efforts are for the most part managed by sales personnel. As needed, the advanced wound care team will assist with creative marketing requirements. Clinical Our advanced wound care global clinical team is located in the U.S. and is comprised of a director, five clinicians and a clinical project manager. The director and project manager are located at corporate headquarters, while the clinicians are geographically disbursed 1 to each of five sales regions. All team members contribute to the development of clinical evidence in support of our advanced would care products, the process of which is managed by the project manager. While the majority of this teams time is spent supporting the U.S. market, they are also responsible for supporting clinical efforts throughout the rest of the world working closely with local management. 5 Product Development In 2014, we added a product development manager to oversee and coordinate our advanced wound care product development efforts, working closely with our operations teams and licensors. Sales Our advanced wound care global sales team is comprised of a vice president and 2 sales administrators at corporate headquarters. In the U.S., our field sales force consists of five regions, each consisting of a regional manager, a product specialist and ten territory managers. Our Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMEA ) sales team is comprised of a general manager and a sales administrator headquartered in the United Kingdom ( U.K. ). The general manager is responsible for managing a direct sales force of six in the U.K. consisting of a sales manager and five territory managers, together with distributor relationships throughout the rest of EMEA. Our Asia Pacific and Latin America ( APLA ) sales team is led by a vice president at corporate headquarters who is responsible for managing distributor relationships throughout APLA. Our plan is to add regional in market distributor sales support within EMEA and APLA as our business grows in these markets. Our traditional wound care sales team is comprised of a vice president of distribution and contract manufacturing, a vice president of first aid products and a vice president of corporate accounts located at corporate headquarters. The vice president of distribution and contract manufacturing is responsible for managing our U.S. distributor and global private label medical relationships. The vice president of first aid products, working with a number of independent brokers, is responsible for managing our branded and private label first aid business. The vice president of corporate accounts, working with 2 field directors and 2 sales operations specialists located at corporate headquarters, is responsible for managing our relationship with group purchasing organizations in the U.S., as well as providing sales analytics for sales management, commission and third party fee payment. Our Canada sales team reports directly to the group president and is responsible for supporting both our advanced and traditional lines of products. The team is comprised of a sales manager and a sales administrator located in our Toronto sales office, together with 3 territory managers and a manufacturer representative covering the major population centers. Competition Many of our competitors are larger and have greater resources than we do. The advanced wound care sector of the global medical device marketplace is characterized by evolving technology and intense competition. We believe that we have assembled a broad range of proprietary advanced wound care products capable of effectively competing in the marketplace. We are recognized for both our entrepreneurial culture that cost effectively incubates product development and our ability to commercialize new advanced wound care products offering superior value. Our traditional wound care products compete in a very intense commodity oriented global marketplace. We offer a broad range of traditional wound care products, some of which have a degree of product differentiation. While our competitors sell products that are in many respects comparable to ours, we have been successful in this environment selling our traditional wound care products on the basis of quality, price and customer service. Product Sourcing Our Operations team headquartered in Toronto, Canada manages our supply chain function which consists of internal product manufacturing, third party supply of product, regulatory, distribution and inventory management. Our main manufacturing facility is located in Toronto and manufactures a broad range of advanced and traditional wound care products. We have a small facility in Nantong, China which we use principally for low volume and labor intensive traditional wound care gauze products. We have a contract manufacturing relationship with a supplier in China for adhesive bandages and related first aid products and 1 in Mexico for paste bandages. All of these facilities are ISO certified. A significant portion of our products are sourced directly from a long standing global ne2rk of third party suppliers. We require that all suppliers conform to the standards set forth in the Good Manufacturing Practice regulations promulgated by the FDA and local health agencies. The majority of these products are manufactured using readily available comp1nts. Accordingly, there are numerous companies capable of manufacturing these products to applicable specifications and regulatory standards. 6 We are contractually obligated to source the bulk h1y used in our MEDIH1Y products exclusively from the product licensor. Both parties effectively manage demand versus capacity on a continuous basis and maintain adequate safety stock levels to guard against any interruption in supply. Other sources of bulk h1y exist. Should the licensor be unable to supply, we have the right to source our requirements elsewhere. We are contractually obligated to source a key comp1nt of our TCC EZ product exclusively from the product licensor. Both parties effectively manage demand versus capacity on a continuous basis and we maintain a reasonable level of safety stock to guard against interruption in supply. We are contractually obligated to source AMNIOEXCEL and AMNIOMATRIX products exclusively from the product licensor. Both parties effectively manage demand versus capacity on a continuous basis and maintain adequate safety stock levels to guard against any interruption in supply. The licensor has agreed to qualify and maintain a qualified back up supplier for these products to protect against a long term interruption in supply. Given the oversight of our manufacturing facilities and our third party suppliers, the availability of other suppliers and our inventory management policy concerning safety stock levels, we do not believe that a temporary interruption of supply or the loss of 1 or more suppliers would have a long term detrimental impact on our supply chain operations. Patents, Trademarks, Proprietary and Non Proprietary Technology We own or license a number of trademarks covering the Company and its products. In addition, we own or license over 50 U.S. patents, corresponding foreign patents and patent applications. Most of the patents relating to the DSC127, MEDIH1Y and BIOGUARD technologies are held under license agreements of indefinite duration. We also have a number of non patented formulations and process technologies that, together with the aforementi1d patents, provide competitive advantages in the marketplace. Government Regulation The manufacture, distribution and advertising of our products are subject to various U.S. and foreign agencies. In addition, we are subject to regulation regarding occupational safety, laboratory practices, environmental protection and hazardous substance control and may be subject to other present and future U.S. and foreign regulations. We believe we are in compliance with all such laws, regulations and standards currently in effect and that the cost of continued compliance will not have a material adverse effect on us. Employees Derma Sciences had 258 full time and 4 part time employees at December 31, 2013 Of these employees, 117 are located in the U.S., 99 in Canada, 37 in China and nine in Europe. The Company considers employee relations to be satisfactory. 7 Item 1A. Risk Factors We have a history of losses and can offer no assurance of future profitability. We incurred net losses of $23,964,053 in 2013 and $12,070,431 in 2012, and additional losses in previous years. At December 31, 2013, we had an accumulated deficit of $64,170,811 We cannot offer any assurance that we will be able to generate sustained or future earnings. Our liquidity may be dependent upon amounts available through additional debt or equity financings. We have a history of operating losses and negative cash flow from operating activities. As such, we have utilized funds from offerings of our equity securities to fund our operations. We have taken steps to improve our overall liquidity and believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet our needs for the next twelve months. However, in the event our cash flow from operating activities is insufficient to meet our requirements, we may be forced either to secure a line of credit or seek additional equity financing. The sale of additional securities could result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could result in operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that such financing would be available or, if available, that such financing could be obtained upon terms acceptable to us. The results of preclinical studies and completed clinical trials are not necessarily predictive of future results, and our current drug candidates may not have favorable results in later studies or trials. Preclinical studies and Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials are not primarily designed to test the efficacy of a drug candidate, but rather to test safety, to study pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and to understand the drug candidate side effects at various doses and schedules. Favorable results in early studies or trials may not be repeated in later studies or trials, including continuing preclinical studies and large scale Phase 3 clinical trials, and our drug candidates in later stage trials may fail to show desired safety and efficacy despite having progressed through earlier stage trials. Unfavorable results from ongoing preclinical studies or clinical trials could result in delays, modifications or abandonment of ongoing or future clinical trials, or abandonment of a clinical program. Preclinical and clinical results are frequently susceptible to varying interpretations that may delay, limit or prevent regulatory approvals or commercialization. Negative or inconclusive results or adverse medical events during a clinical trial could cause a clinical trial to be delayed, repeated or terminated, or a clinical program to be aband1d. We rely on third parties to conduct our clinical trials and many of our preclinical studies. If those parties do not successfully carry out their contractual duties or meet expected deadlines, our drug candidates may not advance in a timely manner or at all. In the course of our preclinical testing and clinical trials, we rely on third parties, including laboratories, investigators, clinical contract research organizations ( CROs ), and manufacturers, to perform critical services for us. For example, we rely on third parties to conduct our clinical trials and many of our preclinical studies. CROs are responsible for many aspects of the trials, including finding and enrolling subjects for testing and administering the trials. Although we rely on these third parties to conduct our clinical trials, we are responsible for ensuring that each of our clinical trials is conducted in accordance with its investigational plan and protocol. Moreover, the FDA and foreign regulatory authorities require us to comply with regulations and standards, commonly referred to as good clinical practices, or GCPs, for conducting, monitoring, recording, and reporting the results of clinical trials to ensure that the data and results are scientifically credible and accurate, and that the trial subjects are adequately informed of the potential risks of participating in clinical trials. Our reliance on third parties does not relieve us of these responsibilities and requirements. These third parties may not be available when we need them or, if they are available, may not comply with all regulatory and contractual requirements or may not otherwise perform their services in a timely or acceptable manner, and we may need to enter into new arrangements with alternative third parties and our clinical trials may be extended, delayed or terminated. These independent third parties may also have relationships with other commercial entities, some of which may compete with us. In addition, if such third parties fail to perform their obligations in compliance with our clinical trial protocols or GCPs, our clinical trials may not meet regulatory requirements or may need to be repeated. As a result of our dependence on third parties, we may face delays or failures outside of our direct control. These risks also apply to the development activities of collaborators, and we do not control their research and development, clinical trial or regulatory activities. 8 Our foreign operations are essential to our economic success and are subject to various unique risks. Our future operations and earnings will depend to a large extent on the results of our international operations and our ability to maintain a continuous supply of wound care products from our international operations and suppliers. While we do not envision any adverse change to our international operations or suppliers, adverse changes to these operations, as a result of political, governmental, regulatory, economic, exchange rate, labor, logistical or other factors, could have a material adverse effect on our future operating results. The rate of reimbursement for the purchase of our products by government and private insurance is subject to change. Sales of several of our wound care products depend partly on the ability of our customers to obtain reimbursement for the cost of our products from government health administration agencies such as Medicare and Medicaid. Both government health administration agencies and private insurance firms continuously seek to reduce healthcare costs. Our ability to commercialize our products successfully will depend in part on the extent to which reimbursement for the costs of such products and related treatments will be available from government health administration authorities, private health insurers and other third party payors. Significant uncertainty exists as to the reimbursement status of newly approved medical products. The continuing efforts of the government, insurance companies, managed care organizations and other payors of healthcare services to contain or reduce costs of healthcare may adversely affect Our ability to set a price we believe is fair for our products; Our ability to generate revenues or achieve or maintain profitability; and The availability to us of capital. Payors are increasingly attempting to contain healthcare costs by limiting both coverage and the level of reimbursement, particularly for new therapeutic products or where payors perceive that the target indication of the new product is well served by existing drugs or other treatments. Accordingly, even if coverage and reimbursement are provided, market acceptance of our products would be adversely affected if the amount of coverage and or reimbursement available for the use of our products proved to be unprofitable for healthcare providers or less profitable than alternative treatments. There have been federal and state legislation changes which have subjected the pricing of healthcare goods and services to government control and made other changes to the U.S. healthcare system. While we cannot predict the outcome of current or future legislation, we anticipate, particularly given the recent enactment of healthcare reform legislation that Congress and state legislatures will continue to introduce initiatives directed at lowering the total cost of healthcare. In addition, in certain foreign markets the pricing of drugs is subject to government control and reimbursement may in some cases be unavailable or insufficient. It is uncertain if future legislation, whether domestic or abroad, will be adopted that might affect our products. It is also uncertain what actions federal, state or private payors for healthcare treatment and services may take in response to any such healthcare reform proposals or legislation. Any such healthcare reforms could have a material and adverse effect on the marketability of any products for which we ultimately receive FDA or other regulatory agency approval or for which we receive government sponsored reimbursements. Our success may depend upon our ability to protect our patents and proprietary technology. We own patents, both in the U.S. and abroad, for several of our products, and rely upon the protection afforded by our patents and trade secrets to protect our technology. Our future success may depend upon our ability to protect our intellectual property. However, the enforcement of intellectual property rights can be both expensive and time consuming. Therefore, we may not be able to devote the resources necessary to prevent infringement of our intellectual property. Also, our competitors may develop or acquire substantially similar technologies without infringing our patents or trade secrets. For these reasons, we cannot be certain that our patents and proprietary technology will provide us with a competitive advantage. 9 Government regulation plays a significant role in our ability to acquire and market products. Government regulation by the U.S. FDA and similar agencies in other countries is a significant factor in the development, manufacturing and marketing of many of our products and in our acquisition or licensing of new products. Complying with government regulations is often time consuming and expensive and may involve delays or actions adversely impacting the marketing and sale of our current or future products. A significant portion of our products are sourced from third parties. A significant portion of our products are sourced in raw, semi finished and finished form directly from third party suppliers. N1 of these sourced products presently account for more than 10% of our sales with the exception of Medih1y and TCC E Z. We maintain good relations with our third party suppliers. With the exception of Medih1y and TCC EZ , there are several third party suppliers available for each of our products. If a current supplier were unable or unwilling to continue to supply our products, sale of the affected products could be delayed for the period necessary to secure a replacement. The technology utilized in many of our advanced wound care products is licensed from third parties and could become unavailable. A significant percentage of our advanced wound care products utilize technology that we license on an exclusive basis from third parties. These products include Medih1y dressings, Bioguard dressings and TCC EZ total contact casts. The licensing agreements that we have with the owners of these technologies are of limited duration (with the exception of Medih1y and Bioguard, which are in perpetuity) and renewals of the agreements are at the discretion of the licensors. In addition, in some instances, the maintenance of the license agreements requires that we meet various minimum sales and or minimum royalty requirements. If we fail to meet the minimum sales or minimum royalty requirements of a given license agreement, there is a possibility that the agreement will be cancelled or not renewed or that our exclusivity under the license agreement will be withdrawn. If any of these events were to occur, our ability to sell the products utilizing the licensed technology could be lost or compromised and our revenues and potential profits could be adversely affected. Competitors could invent products superior to ours and cause our products and technology to become obsolete. The wound care sector of the medical products industry is characterized by rapidly evolving technology and intense competition. Our competitors currently manufacture and distribute a variety of products that are in many respects comparable to our products. Many suppliers of competing products are considerably larger and have much greater resources than we do. In addition, many specialized products companies have formed collaborations with large, established companies to support research, development and commercialization of wound care products which may be competitive with ours. Academic institutions, government agencies and other public and private research organizations are also conducting research activities and may commercialize wound care products on their own or through joint ventures. While we have no specific knowledge of products under development by our competitors, it is possible that these competitors may develop technologies and products that are more effective than any we currently have. If this occurs, any of our products and technology affected by these developments could become obsolete. Although we are insured, any material product liability claims could adversely affect our business. We sell over the counter products and medical devices and are exposed to the risk of lawsuits claiming alleged injury caused by our products. Among the grounds for potential claims against us are injuries due to alleged product inefficacy and injuries resulting from infection due to allegedly non sterile products. Although we carry product liability insurance with limits of $10 million per occurrence and $20 million aggregate with $10.0 million in umbrella coverage, this insurance may not be adequate to reimburse us for all damages that we could suffer as a result of successful product liability claims. Also, defending against a claim could be time consuming and costly. No material product liability claim has ever been made against us and we are not aware of any pending product liability claims. However, a successful material product liability suit could adversely affect our business. 10 The potential increase in common shares due to the conversion, exercise or vesting of outstanding dilutive securities may have a depressive effect upon the market value of our shares. Up to 4,962,541 shares of our common stock were potentially issuable at December 31, 2013 upon the conversion, exercise or vesting of outstanding convertible preferred stock, warrants, options and restricted stock units. The shares of common stock potentially issuable upon conversion, exercise or vesting of these securities are substantial compared to the 17,347,071 shares of common stock outstanding at December 31, 2013 Earnings per share of common stock may be substantially diluted by the existence of these dilutive securities regardless of whether they are converted, exercised or issued. This dilution of earnings per share could have a depressive effect upon the market value of our common stock. Our stock price has been volatile and this volatility is likely to continue. Historically, the market price of our common stock has been volatile. The high and low bid prices for the years 2009 through 2013 are set forth in the table below Derma Sciences, Inc. Trading Range Common Stock Year Low High 2009 $ 192 $ 6.80 2010 $ 4.40 $ 9.00 2011 $ 4.50 $ 1272 2012 $ 6.94 $ 1189 2013 $ 9.93 $ 15.45 Events that may affect our common stock price include Outcome of DSC127 development; Quarter to quarter variations in our operating results; Changes in earnings estimates by securities analysts; Changes in interest rates or other general economic conditions; Changes in market conditions in the wound care industry; Fluctuations in stock market prices and trading volumes of similar companies; Discussion of us or our stock price by the financial and scientific press and in online investor communities; Additions or departures of key personnel; Changes in third party reimbursement policies; The introduction of new products either by us or by our competitors; and The loss of a major customer. Although publicly traded securities are subject to price and volume fluctuations, it is likely that our common stock will experience these fluctuations to a greater degree than the securities of more established and better capitalized organizations. We have not paid, and we are unlikely to pay in the near future, cash dividends on our securities. We have never paid any cash dividends on our common or preferred stock and do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the foreseeable future. The payment of dividends by us will depend on our future earnings, financial condition and such other business and economic factors as our management may consider relevant. 11 Our common stock does not have a vigorous trading market and you may not be able to sell your securities when desired. We have a limited active public market for our common shares. We cannot assure you that a more active public market will develop thereby allowing you to sell large quantities of our shares. Consequently, you may not be able to readily liquidate your investment. Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments Not applicable.
