CIK: 105770
Company Name: WEST PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICES INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-02-28
Accession Number: 0000105770-11-000016


ITEM 1 BUSINESS 3 ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS 10 ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 16 ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES 17 ITEM 3 ITEM 3 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 18 ITEM 4. (REMOVED AND RESERVED) 18 EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE COMPANY 18 I ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES 20 ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 22 ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 24 ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 37 ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 40 ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 73 ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 73 ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION 74 II ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 75 ITEM 11 ITEM 11 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 75 ITEM 12 ITEM 12 SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 75 ITEM 13 ITEM 13 CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE 76 ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 76 V ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES 77 2 Table of Contents ITEM 1 ITEM 1 . BUSINESS. General West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc. (which may be referred to as West , the Company , we , us or our ) is a manufacturer of comp1nts and systems for the packaging and delivery of injectable drugs as well as delivery system comp1nts for the pharmaceutical, healthcare and consumer products industries. Our products include stoppers and seals for vials, prefillable syringe comp1nts and systems, comp1nts for intravenous and blood collection systems, safety and administration systems, advanced injection systems, and contract design and manufacturing services. Ou r customers include the leading global producers and distributors of pharmaceuticals, biologics, medical devices and personal care products. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on July 27, 1923 All trademarks and registered trademarks used in this report are the property of West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc., either directly or indirectly through its subsidiaries unless noted otherwise. Teflon is a registered trademark of E.I. DuPont de Nemours and Company. Crystal Zenith is a registered trademark of Daikyo Seiko, Ltd. Acquisitions In July 2010, we acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of La Model Ltd., a developer of an electronic patch injector system using pre filled cartridge technology. In July 2009, we acquired the ris safety syringe system and other intellectual property and business assets from Plastef Investissements SA, a developer and manufacturer of safety systems. For additional details regarding these acquisitions, see Note 2, Acquisitions , to our consolidated financial statements. West Website West maintains a website at www.westpharma.com . Our Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available on our website under the Investors SEC Filings caption as soon as reasonably practical after we electronically file the material with, or furnish it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). These filings are also available to the public over the Internet at the SEC website at www.sec.gov . You may also read and copy any document we file at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F. Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room. Throughout this Form 10 K, we incorporate by reference certain information from parts of other documents filed with the SEC and from our Proxy Statement for the 2011 Annual Meeting of Shareholders ( 2011 Proxy Statement ), which will be filed with the SEC within 120 days following the end of our 2010 fiscal year. Our 2011 Proxy Statement will be available on our website on or about March 31, 2011, under the caption Investors Proxy Materials . Information about our corporate governance, including our Corporate Governance Principles and Code of Business Conduct, as well as information about our Directors, Board Committees, Committee Charters, and instructions on how to contact the Board is available on our website under the Investors Corporate Governance caption. Information relating to the West Pharmaceutical Services Dividend Reinvestment Plan is also available on our website under the Investors Dividend Reinvestment Program caption. 3 Table of Contents We will provide any of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to John R. Gailey III, Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary, West Pharmaceutical Services, Inc., 101 Gordon Drive, Lionville, PA 19341 Business Segments Effective January 1, 2010, our business operations were reorganized into 2 new divisions, Pharmaceutical Packaging Systems ( Packaging Systems ) and Pharmaceutical Delivery Systems ( Delivery Systems ), in order to better align our business units with the underlying markets and customers they serve. All historical periods have been restated for the changes to our segment reporting structure. Comparative segment revenues and related financial information for 2010, 2009 and 2008 are presented in a table contained in Note 5, Segment Information, to our consolidated financial statements and are discussed within Results of Operations i n the Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this 2010 Form 10 K. Packaging Systems Segment Our Packaging Systems segment designs, manufactures and sells a variety of packaging comp1nts and systems used in injectable drug delivery for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries. The growth strategy for Packaging Systems includes organic growth through market segmentation, new product innovation, strategic acquisitions and geographic expansion. The primary comp1nts we manufacture are subject to regulatory oversight within our customers manufacturing facilities. We have manufacturing facilities in North and South America, Europe and Asia, with affiliated companies in Mexico and Japan. See Item 2, Properties , for additional information on our manufacturing and oth er sites. Our Packaging Systems segment consists of 3 operating segments Americas, Europe and Asia Pacific which are aggregated for reporting purposes. The Packaging Systems business is composed of the following product lines Pharmaceutical packaging Elastomeric stoppers and discs, which serve as primary closures for pharmaceutical vials. Secondary closures for pharmaceutical vials called Flip Off seals, consisting of an aluminum seal and a removable plastic button that is removed to permit needle access to the vial contents. Elastomeric plungers, needle shields and tip caps to fit most standard prefilled syringes and combination seals for dental cartridges and pen delivery systems. Pharmaceutical containers, closures and dispensers, including the West Ready Pack system. Enhanced comp1nt processing NovaPure , Envision , VeriSure , Westar RS (ready to sterilize) and Westar RU (ready to use). Disposable medical comp1nts Elastomeric comp1nts for blood collection systems, as well as flashback bulbs and sleeve stoppers for intravenous dispensing systems. Elastomer and co molded elastomer plastic comp1nts for infusion and intravenous systems. Non filled syringe comp1nts. Dropper bulbs for applications such as eye, ear and nasal drops, diagnostic products and dispensing systems. 4 Table of Contents Laboratory and other services Extractables and leachables testing, package container testing, method development validation, stability testing, process development and problem resolution. Sales of pharmaceutical packaging comp1nts represented approximately 60%, 60% and 59% of consolidated net sales for 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Disposable medical comp1nts sales, as a percent of consolidated net sales, were 9%, 10% and 10% for 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Our tamper evident Flip Off seals are sold in a wide range of sizes and colors to meet customers needs for product identification and differentiation. The seals can be provided using proprietary printing and embossing technology for multiple layers of protection, such as point of use instructions, item level information such as vial contents, drug dosage and strength, and cautionary statements that can serve as counterfeiting deterrence. Elastomeric comp1nts are offered in a variety of standard and customer specific configurations and formulations and are available with advanced barrier films and coatings to enhance their performance. West FluroTec coating is a film that is applied using a patented molding process to reduce the risk of product loss by contamination, enhance seal integrity and protect the shelf life of packaged drugs. We also apply a Teflon coating to the surface of stoppers and plungers to improve compatibility between the closure and the drug. B2 Coating is a coating applied to the surface of stoppers and plungers using a patented process that eliminates the need for conventional silic1 application. It helps manufacturers reduce product rejections due to trace levels of silic1 molecules found in non coated packaged drug compounds. Fluro Tec and B2 Coating technologies are licensed from our Japanese partner, Daikyo Seiko, Ltd. The West Ready Pack system is a 1 source solution ideal for pharmaceutical research and development and clinical work. Each system comes with West stoppers, Flip Off seals and vials conveniently packaged in small volumes. Because the comp1nts are delivered ready to use, comp1nt preparation is eliminated from our customers processing, saving them time and m1y. West Envision comp1nts (plungers and stoppers) are inspected by an automated vision inspection system to ensure they meet enhanced quality specifications for visible and subvisible particulate and contamination. Our VeriSure comp1nts are an example of how laboratory services can be combined with a product offering. These comp1nts allow pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical companies to navigate the complex task of extractables identification and the related analysis for qualifying a drug product container closure system more efficiently. The customer receives a Certificate of Analysis with each shipment of comp1nts. Also, with a known extractables profile, customers are able to begin the design of leachables studies on a quicker basis. In addition, our post manufacturing processes, Westar RS and Westar RU, are documented and fully validated procedures for washing and siliconizing stoppers and syringe comp1nts to remove biological materials and endotoxins. Westar RS prepares comp1nts for introduction into the customer sterilizer and Westar RU provides sterilized comp1nts. The Westar processes increase the overall efficiency of injectable drug production by outsourcing comp1nt processing, thereby eliminating steps otherwise required in each of our customers manufacturing processes, and help to assure compliance with the latest regulatory requirements for comp1nt preparation. As an adjunct to our Packaging Systems products, we offer contract analytical laboratory services for testing and evaluating primary drug packaging comp1nts and their compatibility with the contained drug formulation. West Analytical Services provides us and our customers with in depth knowledge and analysis of the interaction and compatibility of drug products with elastomer, glass and plastic packaging comp1nts. Our analytical laboratories also provide specialized testing for complete drug delivery systems. 5 Table of Contents Delivery Systems Segment Our Delivery Systems segment provides innovative solutions for injectable drug delivery to major pharmaceutical and biotech customers. This segment combines global contract manufacturing solution capabilities with various proprietary technologies, such as Daikyo Crystal Zenith ( CZ ), ConfiDose and NovaGuard , which are discussed below in further detail. As part of its innovation initiative, the Delivery Systems segment has acquired various companies and technologies since 2005 including the Tech Group (Custom contract manufacturing); Medimop and La Model Ltd. (Administration systems); and ConfiDose and ris (Advanced injection systems). We intend to pursue growth in Delivery Systems through the development and commercialization of proprietary multi comp1nt systems for injectable drug administration and other healthcare applications. This segment has manufacturing operations in North America and Europe. See Item 2, Properties , for additional information on our manufacturing and other sites. Our Delivery Systems segment consists of 2 operating segments Americas and International which are aggregated for reporting purposes. The Delivery Systems business is composed of the following product lines Healthcare devices Daikyo CZ ready to use prefilled syringe system, including luer lock and insert needle options. Daikyo CZ sterile vials, in a range of sizes, as well as storage containers for bulk drug product and custom drug containers. Contract manufacturing and assembly of injection molded comp1nts and devices for surgical, ophthalmic, diagnostic and drug delivery systems. Administration systems Sterile devices for the reconstitution, transfer and administration of drug products, including patented products such as the Mixject , Mix2Vial and vial adapters. Electronic patch injector system, designed for subcutaneous delivery of higher volumes of biologic drugs. Advanced injection systems NovaGuard passive safety needle system . ConfiDose disposable auto injector system. The ris safety system for prefilled syringes. Consumer products Contract manufacturing of various personal care and consumer products, including infant nurser assemblies, closures for beverage containers, child resistant and tamper evident closures and dispensers, etc. The Delivery Systems segment also has expertise in product design and development, including in house mold design and construction, an engineering center for developmental and prototype tooling, process design and validation and high speed automated assemblies. Technologies include multi comp1nt molding, in mold labeling, ultrasonic welding and clean room molding and device assembly. 6 Table of Contents Sales of healthcare devices represented approximately 16% of consolidated net sales for 2010, 2009 and 2008. Personal and consumer product sales, as a percent of consolidated net sales, were 6%, 5% and 7% for 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Products recently brought to market are the Daikyo CZ 1ml long Insert Needle syringe and the ConfiDose auto injector systems. In addition, the recently acquired Electronic Patch Injector system was introduced during 2010 and is under evaluation by many biopharmaceutical companies. The Daikyo CZ 1ml long Insert Needle syringe system is the market first syringe system without silic1 oil lubrication and incorporating an insert molded needle to avoid the need for adhesive. The luer lock version of the Daikyo CZ syringe system was introduced previously, along with several sizes of sterile vials. Additional sizes of vials continue to be introduced. CZ technology is licensed from Daikyo Seiko, Ltd. Our ConfiDose auto injector system enhances patient compliance and safety. With ConfiDose, the needle remains shielded at all times and ret racts automatically after the injection. The system eliminates preparation steps and automates the injection of drugs, providing patients with a sterile, single use disposable system that can be readily used at home. Restructuring Initiatives In December 2010, our Board of Directors approved a plan to reduce our cost structure and improve operating efficiency by consolidating certain operations and eliminating a limited number of operational and administrative positions. This plan affects employees and manufacturing facilities within both of our reporting segments and involves the closure of a plant in Montgomery, Pennsylvania, and a reduction in operations at a manufacturing facility in St. Austell, England. We expect to incur approximately $19.0 million to $210 million in restructuring charges through the end of 2012 as the work at those plants is moved to other facilities. Restructuring activities will also result in the elimination of approximately 50 administrative, engineering and other operating positions at additional locations. A total of approximately 367 positions will be eliminated as part of this plan. During 2010, we incurred actual charges of $14.5 million as part of this plan, consisting of $10.1 million in severance and employee benefits and $4.4 million in asset impairment charges. In November 2009, we announced restructuring plans for certain business operations and support functions affecting both of our reporting segments. The Packaging Systems plan involved exiting certain specialized laboratory service offerings due to a change in market demand, reducing support personnel primarily associated with information technology applications and discontinuing other non core initiatives and disposing of the associated assets. The Delivery Systems plan was intended to better align our available production capacity with expected levels of contract manufacturing activity by consolidating manufacturing operations and support functions. Total charges incurred during 2009 and 2010 as part of this program were $9.0 million, which consisted of $34 million in employee severance benefits and asset relocation costs, and $5.6 milli on in asset impairment and disposal charges, primarily related to removing certain laboratory equipment and plant assets from service. For additional details regarding these programs, see Note 3, Restructuring and Other Item , to our consolidated financial statements. International We have significant operations outside of the United States ( U.S. ). They are managed through the same business segments as our U.S. operations Packaging Systems and Delivery Systems. Sales outside of the U.S. account for approximately 52% of consolidated net sales. For a geographic breakdown of sales, see the table in Note 5, Segment Information, to the consolidated financial statements. Although the general business processes are similar to the domestic business, international operations are exposed to additional risks. These risks include currency fluctuations relative to the U.S. dollar, multiple tax jurisdictions and, particularly in South America and Israel, political and social issues that could destabilize local markets and affect the demand for our products. 7 Table of Contents Depending on the direction of change relative to the U.S. dollar, foreign currency values can increase or decrease the reported dollar value of our net assets and results of operations. See the discussion under the caption Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Foreign Currency Translation in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements. We also have exposure to the impact of changes in currency exchange rates on assets and liabilities that are not denominated in the functional currency of the respective subsidiary. We attempt to minimize some of our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations through the use of forward exchange contracts and foreign currency denominated debt. This hedging activity is generally discussed in Note 1 under the caption Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Financial Instruments and in Note 12, Derivative Financial Instruments , to our consolidated financial statements. Raw Materials We use 3 basic raw materials in the manufacture of our products elastomers, aluminum and plastic. Elastomers include both natural and synthetic materials. We have access to adequate supplies of these raw materials to meet our production needs through agreements with suppliers. We employ a supply chain management strategy in our business segments, which involves purchasing from integrated suppliers that control their own sources of supply. Due to regulatory control over our production processes, and the cost and time involved in qualifying suppliers, we rely on single source suppliers for many critical raw materials. This strategy increases the risk that our supply chain may be interrupted in the event of a supplier production problem. These risks are managed, where possible, by selecting suppliers with multiple manufacturing sites, rigid quality control systems, surplus inventory levels and other methods of maintaining supply in case of an interruption in production, and therefore we foresee no significant availability problems in the near future. Intellectual Property Rights Patents and other proprietary rights are important to our business. We own or license numerous patents and have patent applications pending in the U.S. and in other countries that relate to various aspects of our products. In addition, key value added and proprietary products and processes are licensed from Daikyo Seiko, Ltd. Our patents and other proprietary rights have been useful in establishing our market share and in the growth of our business, and are expected to continue to be of value in the future as we continue to develop proprietary products. Although important in the aggregate, we do not consider our business to be materially dependent on any individual patent or license. We also rely heavily on trade secrets, manufacturing know how and continuing technological innovations, as well as in licensing opportunities, to maintain and further develop our competitive position, particularly in the area of formulation development and tooling design. Seasonality Although our Packaging Systems business is not inherently seasonal, sales and operating profit in the second half of the year are typically lower than the first half primarily due to scheduled plant shutdowns in conjunction with our customers production schedules and the year end impact of holidays on production. Working Capital We are required to carry significant amounts of inventory to meet customer requirements. In addition, some of our supply agreements require us to purchase inventory in bulk orders, which increases inventory levels but decreases the risk of supply interruption. Levels of inventory are also influenced by the seasonal patterns addressed above. For a more detailed discussion of working capital, please see the discussion in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under the caption Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resource s. 8 Table of Contents Marketing Our Packaging Systems customers include practically every major branded pharmaceutical, generic and biopharmaceutical company in the world. Packaging Systems comp1nts and other products are sold to major pharmaceutical, biotechnology and hospital supply medical device companies, which incorporate them into their products for distribution to the ultimate end user. Our Delivery Systems segment sells to many of the world largest pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical and medical device companies and to large customers within the personal care and food and beverage industries. Delivery Systems comp1nts generally are incorporated into our customers manufacturing lines for further processing or assembly. West products and services are distributed primarily through our own sales force and distribution ne2rk, with limited use of contract sales agents and regional distributors. Our ten largest customers accounted for 417% of our consolidated net sales in 2010, but n1 of these customers individually accounted for more than 10% of net sales. Order Backlog At December 31, 2010, our order backlog was $250.6 million, all of which is expected to be filled during 2011 The order backlog was $238.7 million at the end of 2009. The increase is primarily due to the timing of shipments, as some of our customers focused on reducing their year end working capital, and strengthening demand for our advanced packaging products. Order backlog includes firm orders placed by customers for manufacture over a period of time according to their schedule or upon confirmation by the customer. We also have contractual arrangements with a number of our customers. Products covered by these contracts are included in our backlog only as orders are received. Competition We compete with several companies across our Packaging Systems product lines. However, we believe that we supply a major portion of the U.S. market for pharmaceutical elastomer and metal packaging comp1nts and have a significant share of the European market for these comp1nts. Because of the special nature of our pharmaceutical packaging comp1nts and our long standing participation in the market, competition is based primarily on product design and performance, although total cost is becoming increasingly important as pharmaceutical companies continue with aggressive cost control programs across their operations. We differentiate ourselves from our competition as a "full service, value added" global supplier that can provide pre sale formula and engineering development, analytical services, regulatory expertise and post manufacturing technologies, as well as after sale technical support. Customers also appreciate the global scope of West manufacturing capability and our ability to produce many products at multiple sites. Our Delivery Systems business competes in very competitive markets for both healthcare and consumer products. The competition varies from smaller regional companies to large global molders that command significant market shares. There are extreme cost pressures and many of our customers look off shore to reduce cost. We differentiate ourselves by leveraging our global capability and by employing new technologies such as high speed automated assembly, insert molding, multi shot molding and expertise with multiple piece closure systems. Because of the more demanding regulatory requirements in the medical device comp1nt area, there are a smaller number of competitors, mostly large scale companies. We compete for this market on the basis of our reputation for quality and reliability in engineering and project management, diverse contract manufacturing capabilities and knowledge of and experience in complying with FDA requirements. With our range of proprietary technologies, we compete with new and established companies in the area of drug delivery devices, including suppliers of prefillable syringes, auto injectors, safety needles and other proprietary systems. 9 Table of Contents Research and Development Activities We maintain our own research scale production facilities and laboratories for developing new products, and offer contract engineering design and development services to assist customers with new product development. Our quality control, regulatory and laboratory testing capabilities are used to ensure compliance with applicable manufacturing and regulatory standards for primary and secondary pharmaceutical packaging comp1nts. The engineering departments are responsible for product and tooling design and testing, and for the design and construction of processing equipment. We continue to seek new innovative opportunities for acquisition, licensing, partnering or development within injectable packaging and delivery systems, most of which will be manufactured and marketed by our Delivery Systems segment. Research and development spending w ill continue to increase as we pursue innovative strategic platforms in prefillable syringe, injectable container, advanced injection and safety and administration systems. Commercial development of our new products and services for medical and pharmaceutical applications commonly requires several years. New products that we develop may require separate approval as medical devices, and products that are intended to be used in packaging and delivery of pharmaceutical products will be subject to both customer acceptance of our products and regulatory approval of the customer products following our development period. We spent $9.8 million in 2010, $9.0 million in 2009 and $8.6 million in 2008 on research and development for the Packaging Systems segment. Delivery Systems incurred research and development expenses of $14.1 million, $10.9 million, and $10.1 million in the years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Environmental Regulations We are subject to various federal, state and local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to the protection of the environment. Our compliance with these laws and regulations has not had a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. There were no material capital expenditures for environmental control facilities in 2010 and there are no material expenditures planned for such purposes for 2011 Employees As of December 31, 2010, we employed approximately 6,600 people in our operations throughout the world. ITEM 1A . RISK FACTORS. The statements in this section describe major risks to our business and should be considered carefully. In addition, these statements constitute our cautionary statements under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Our disclosure and analysis in this 2010 Form 10 K contains some forward looking statements that are based on management beliefs and assumptions, current expectations, estimates and forecasts. We also provide forward looking statements in other materials we release to the public as well as oral forward looking statements. Such statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events. They do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. We have attempted, wherever possible, to identify forward looking statements by using words such as estimate, expect, intend, believe, plan, anticipate and other words and terms of similar meaning. In particular, these include statements relating to future actions, business pl ans and prospects, new products, future performance or results of current or anticipated products, sales efforts, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, economic effects, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results. Many of the factors that will determine our future results are beyond our ability to control or predict. Achievement of future results is subject to known or unknown risks or uncertainties, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from past results and those expressed or implied in any forward looking statement. You should bear this in mind as you consider forward looking statements. 10 Table of Contents Unless required by applicable securities law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. We also refer you to further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q and 8 K reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our operating results may be adversely affected by unfavorable economic and market conditions. The current uncertainty in the global economy, including the continuing effects of recession or slow economic growth in the U.S. and Europe, may negatively affect our operating results. Examples of the effects of these continuing global economic challenges include our suppliers and our customers inability to access the credit markets at commercially reasonable rates; reduction in sales due to customers decreasing their inventories in the near term or long term or due to liquidity difficulties; reduction in sales due to shortages of materials we purchase from our suppliers; reduction in research and development efforts and expenditures by our customers; our inability to hedge our currency and raw material risks sufficiently or at commercially reasonable prices; insolvency of suppliers or customers; inflationary pressures on our supplies or our products; and increased expenses due to growing taxation of corporate profits or revenues. Our operating results in 1 or more geographic regions may also be affected by uncertain or changing economic conditions within that region. If economic and market conditions in the U.S. or Europe weaken further, we may experience material adverse impacts on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our sales and profitability are largely dependent on the sale of drug products delivered by injection and the packaging of drug products. If the products developed by our customers in the future use another delivery system, our sales and profitability could suffer. Our business depends to a substantial extent on customers' continued sales and development of products that are delivered by injection. If our customers fail to continue to sell, develop and deploy new injectable products or we are unable to develop new products that assist in the delivery of drugs by alternative methods, our sales and profitability may suffer. If we are unable to provide comparative value advantages, timely fulfillment of customer orders, or resist pricing pressure, we will have to reduce our prices, which may negatively impact our profit margins. We compete with several companies across our major product lines. Because of the special nature of these products, competition is based primarily on product design and performance, although total cost is becoming increasingly important as pharmaceutical companies continue with aggressive cost control programs across their entire operations. Competitors often compete on the basis of price. We differentiate ourselves from our competition as a "full service value added" supplier that is able to provide pre sale compatibility studies and other services and sophisticated post sale technical support on a global basis. However, we face continued pricing pressure from our customers and competitors. If we are unable to resist or to offset the effects of continued pricing pressure through our value added services, improved operating efficiencies an d reduced expenditures, or if we have to reduce our prices, our sales and profitability may suffer. Consolidation in the pharmaceutical and healthcare industries could adversely affect our future revenues and operating income. The pharmaceutical and medical technology industries have experienced a significant amount of consolidation. As a result of this consolidation, competition to provide goods and services to customers has increased. In addition, group purchasing organizations and integrated health delivery ne2rks have served to concentrate purchasing decisions for some customers, which has placed pricing pressure on suppliers. Further consolidation within the industries we serve could exert additional pressure on the prices of our products. 11 Table of Contents We are subject to regulation by governments around the world, and if these regulations are not complied with, existing and future operations may be curtailed, and we could be subject to liability. The design, development, manufacturing, marketing and labeling of certain of our products and our customers products that incorporate our products are subject to regulation by governmental authorities in the U.S., Europe and other countries, including the FDA and the European Medicines Agency. Complying with governmental regulation can be costly and can result in required modification or withdrawal of existing products and a substantial delay in the introduction of new products. Failure to comply with applicable regulatory requirements or failure to obtain regulatory approval for a new product could result in expenses and actions that could adversely affect our business and financial performance. Changes in the regulation of drug products and devices may adversely affect our business . An effect of the governmental regulation of our customers drug products, devices, and manufacturing processes is that compliance with regulations makes it costly and time consuming for customers to substitute or replace comp1nts and devices produced by 1 supplier with those from another. The regulation of our customers products that incorporate our comp1nts and devices has increased over time. If the applicable regulations were to be modified in a way that reduced the cost and time involved for customers to substitute 1 supplier comp1nts or devices for those made by another, it is likely that the competitive pressure would increase and adversely affect our sales and profitability. If we are not successful in protecting our intellectual property rights, we may harm our ability to compete. Our patents, trademarks and other intellectual property are important to our business. We rely on patents, trademark, copyright, trade secret, and other intellectual property laws, as well as nondisclosure and confidentiality agreements and other methods, to protect our proprietary information, technologies and process. We also have obligations with respect to the non use and non disclosure of third party intellectual property. We may need to engage in litigation or similar activities to enforce our intellectual property rights, to protect our trade secrets or to determine the validity and scope of proprietary rights of others. Any such litigation could require us to expend significant resources and divert the efforts and attention of our management and other personnel from our business operations. We cannot assure you that the steps we will take to prevent misappropriation, infringement or other violation of our intellectual property or the intellectual property of others will be successful. In addition, effective patent, copyright, trademark and trade secret protection may be unavailable or limited for some of our trademarks and patents in some foreign countries. Failure to protect our intellectual property could harm our business and results of operations. In addition, we may not prevent competitors from independently developing products and services similar to or duplicative to ours. Disruption in our manufacturing facilities could materially adversely affect our ability to make and sell products and have a negative impact on our reputation, performance or financial condition. We have manufacturing sites all over the world. In addition, in some instances, the manufacturing of certain product lines is concentrated in 1 or more of our plants. The functioning of our manufacturing and distribution assets and systems could be disrupted for reasons either within or beyond our control, including extremes of weather or longer term climatic changes; natural disasters; war; accidental damage; disruption to the supply of material or services; product quality and safety issues; systems failure; workforce actions; or environmental contamination. There is a risk that incident management systems in place may prove inadequate and that any disruption may materially adversely affect our ability to make and sell products and therefore materially adversely affect our reputation, performance or financial condition. font> 12 Table of Contents The medical technology industry is very competitive and new products may replace our products or cause a reduction in demand. The medical technology industry is subject to rapid technological changes, and we face significant competition across our product lines and in each market in which our products are sold. We face this competition from a wide range of companies. These include large medical device companies, some of which may have greater financial and marketing resources than we do. We also face competition from firms that are more specialized than we are with respect to particular markets. In some instances, competitors, including pharmaceutical companies, also offer, or are attempting to develop, alternative therapies for disease states that may be delivered without a medical device. The development of new or improved products, processes or technologies by other companies (such as needle free injection technology) may render some of our products or propos ed products obsolete or less competitive. Risks associated with foreign operations, including changes in import export duties, political or economic climates, or exchange rates may adversely affect our business. We conduct business in most of the major pharmaceutical markets in the world. Virtually all of the international sales and related operating costs are denominated in the currency of the local country and translated into U.S. dollars, which can result in significant fluctuations in the amount of those sales or earnings. The main currencies, to which we are exposed, besides the U.S. dollar, are the Euro, British Pound, Danish Kr1 and Singapore Dollar. The exchange rates between these currencies and the U.S. dollar in recent years have fluctuated significantly and may continue to do so in the future. In addition to translation risks, we incur currency transaction gains or losses when we or 1 of our subsidiaries enters into a purchase or sales transaction in a currency other than that entity local currency. Our international operations are also exposed to the following risks transportation delays and interruptions; political and economic instability and disruptions; imposition of duties and tariffs; import and export controls; the risks of divergent business expectations or cultural incompatibility inherent in establishing and maintaining operations in foreign countries; difficulties in staffing and managing multi national operations; labor strikes and or disputes; and potentially adverse tax consequences. Limitations on our ability to enforce legal rights and remedies with third parties or our joint venture partners outside of the U.S. could also create exposure. In addition, we may not be able to operate in compliance with foreign laws and regulations, or comply with applicable customs, currency exchange control regulations, transfer pric ing regulations or any other laws or regulations to which we may be subject, in the event that these laws or regulations change. Any of these events could have an adverse effect on our international operations in the future by reducing the demand for our products, decreasing the prices at which we can sell our products or otherwise have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Disruptions in the supply of key raw materials and difficulties in the supplier qualification process could adversely impact our operations. We employ a supply chain management strategy in our reporting segments, which involves purchasing from integrated suppliers that control their own sources of supply. This strategy has reduced the number of raw material suppliers we have used in recent years. This increases the risk that our supply lines may be interrupted in the event of a supplier production problem or financial difficulties. If 1 of our suppliers is unable to supply materials needed for our products or our strategies for managing these risks are unsuccessful, we may be unable to complete the process of qualifying new replacement materials for some programs in time to meet future production needs. Prolonged disruptions in the supply of any of our key raw materials, difficulty completing qualification of new sources of supply, or in implementing the use of replacement m aterials or new sources of supply could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition or cash flows. 13 Table of Contents Raw material and energy prices have a significant impact on our profitability. If raw material and or energy prices increase, and we cannot pass those price increases on to our customers, our profitability and financial condition may suffer. We use 3 basic raw materials in the manufacture of our products elastomers (which include synthetic and natural material), aluminum and plastic. In addition, our manufacturing facilities consume a wide variety of energy products to fuel, heat and cool our operations. Supply and demand factors, which are beyond our control, generally affect the price of our raw materials and utility costs. If we are unable to pass along increased raw material prices and energy costs to our customers, our profitability, and thus our financial condition, may be adversely affected. The prices of many of these raw materials and utilities are cyclical and volatile. For example, the prices of certain commodities, particularly petroleum based raw materials, have in the recent past exhibited rapid changes, affecting the cost of synthetic elastomers and plasti c. While we generally attempt to pass along increased costs to our customers in the form of sales price increases, historically there has been a time delay between raw material and or energy price increases and our ability to increase the prices of our products. In some circumstances, we may not be able to increase the prices of our products due to competitive pressure and other factors. We may not be successful in our future acquisition or other strategic transaction endeavors, if any, which could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations. We have historically engaged in acquisition activity and we may in the future engage in acquisitions or other strategic transactions, such as joint ventures or investments in other entities. We may be unable to identify suitable targets, opportunistic or otherwise, for acquisitions or other strategic transactions in the future. If we identify a suitable candidate, our ability to successfully implement the strategic transaction would depend on a variety of factors including our ability to obtain financing on acceptable terms, and to comply with the restrictions contained in our debt agreements. Strategic transactions involve risks, including those associated with integrating the operations or maintaining the operations as separate (as applicable), financial reporting, disparate technologies and personnel of acquired companies, joint ventur es or related companies; managing geographically dispersed operations or other strategic investments; the diversion of management attention from other business concerns; the inherent risks in entering markets or lines of business in which we have either limited or no direct experience; unknown risks; and the potential loss of key employees, customers and strategic partners of acquired companies, joint ventures or companies in which we may make strategic investments. We may not successfully integrate any businesses or technologies we may acquire or strategically develop in the future and may not achieve anticipated revenue and cost benefits relating to any such strategic transactions. Strategic transactions may be expensive, time consuming and may strain our resources. Strategic transactions may not be accretive to our earnings and may negatively impact our results of operations as a result of, among other things, the incurrence of debt, 1 time write offs of goodwill and amortization expenses of oth er intangible assets. In addition, strategic transactions that we may pursue could result in dilutive issuances of equity securities. Product defects could adversely affect the results of our operations. The design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices involve certain inherent risks. Manufacturing or design defects, unanticipated use of our products, or inadequate disclosure of risks relating to the use of our products can lead to injury or other adverse events. These events could lead to recalls or safety alerts relating to our products (either voluntary or required by the FDA or similar governmental authorities in other countries), and could result, in certain cases, in the removal of a product from the market. A recall could result in significant costs, as well as negative publicity and damage to our reputation that could reduce demand for our products. Personal injuries relating to the use of our products can also result in product liability claims being brought against us. In some circumstances, such adverse events could also cause delays in new product approvals. 14 Table of Contents Our operations must comply with environmental statutes and regulations, and any failure to comply could result in extensive costs which would harm our business. The manufacture of some of our products involves the use, transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous or toxic materials and is subject to various environmental protection and occupational health and safety laws and regulations in the countries in which we operate. This has exposed us in the past, and could expose us in the future, to risks of accidental contamination and events of non compliance with environmental laws. Any such occurrences could result in regulatory enforcement or personal injury and property damage claims or could lead to a shutdown of some of our operations, which could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations. We currently incur costs to comply with environmental laws and regulations and these costs may become more significant. A loss of key personnel or highly skilled employees could disrupt our operations. Our executive officers are critical to the management and direction of our businesses. Our future success depends, in large part, on our ability to retain these officers and other key employees, including people in technical, marketing, sales and research positions. Competition for experienced employees, particularly for persons with specialized skills, can be intense. Our ability to recruit such talent will depend on a number of factors, including compensation and benefits, work location and work environment. If we cannot effectively recruit and retain qualified executives and employees, our business could be adversely affected. Although we believe that we will be able to attract and retain talented personnel and replace key personnel should the need arise, our inability to do so timely could disrupt the operations of the unit affected o r our overall operations. In addition, because of the complex nature of many of our products and programs, we are generally dependent on an educated and highly skilled engineering staff and workforce. Our operations could be disrupted by a shortage of available skilled employees. The uncertain effects of potential climate change legislation could lead to significantly increased costs. If legislation or regulations are enacted or promulgated in the U.S., Europe or Asia or any other jurisdictions in which we do business that limit or reduce allowable greenhouse gas emissions and other emissions, such restrictions could have a significant effect on our operating and financial decisions, including those involving capital expenditures to reduce emissions, and our results of operations. Our manufacturing operations may not be able to operate as planned if we are not able to comply with new legal and regulatory legislation around climate change, or it may become too costly to operate in a profitable manner. Additionally, suppliers added expenses could be passed on to us in the form of higher prices and we may not be able to pass on such expenses to our customers through price increases. Federal healthcare reform may adversely affect our results of operations. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the PPACA ) was enacted in March 2010. The PPACA reduces Medicare and Medicaid payments to hospitals, clinical laboratories and pharmaceutical companies, and could otherwise reduce the volume of medical procedures. These factors, in turn, could result in reduced demand for our products and increased downward pricing pressure. It is also possible that the PPACA will result in lower reimbursements for our customers products. While the PPACA is intended to expand health insurance coverage to uninsured persons in the United States, the impact of any overall increase in access to healthcare on sales of West products is uncertain at this time. Our sales depend, in part, on the extent to which pharmaceutical companies and healthcare providers and facilities are rei mbursed by government authorities, private insurers and other third party payers for the costs of our products. The coverage policies and reimbursement levels of third party payers, which can vary among public and private sources, may affect which products customers purchase and the prices they are willing to pay for these products in a particular jurisdiction. Legislative or administrative reforms to reimbursement systems in the United States (as part of the PPACA) or abroad (for example, those under consideration in France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom) could significantly reduce reimbursement for our customers products, which could in turn reduce the demand for our products. Management continues to evaluate the PPACA and will review regulations to determine the impact on us. 15 Table of Contents No assurance can be given that we will continue to pay or declare dividends. We have historically paid dividends. However, there can be no assurance that we will pay or declare dividends in the future. The actual declaration and payment of future dividends, the amount of any such dividends, and the establishment of record and payment dates, if any, are subject to determination by our Board of Directors each quarter after its review of our then current strategy, applicable debt covenants and financial performance and position, among other things. Our declaration and payment of future dividends is subject to risks and uncertainties, including deterioration of our financial performance or position; inability to declare a dividend in compliance with applicable laws or debt covenants; an increase in our cash needs or decrease in available cash; and the business judgment of the Board of Directors that a declaration of a dividend is not in the Company best interests. Our results of operations and earnings may not meet guidance or expectations . We provide public guidance on our expected results of operations for future periods. This guidance is comprised of forward looking statements subject to risks and uncertainties, including the risks and uncertainties described in this 2010 Form 10 K and in our other public filings and public statements, and is based necessarily on assumptions we make at the time we provide such guidance. Our guidance may not always be accurate. If, in the future, our results of operations for a particular period do not meet our guidance or the expectations of investment analysts or if we reduce our guidance for future periods, the market price of our common stock could decline significantly. We are exposed to credit risk on accounts receivable and certain prepayments made in the normal course of business. This risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen. A substantial majority of our outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance. In addition, we have made prepayments associated with insurance premiums and other advances in the normal course of business. While we have procedures to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on trade receivables and other current assets, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit our credit risk and avoid losses, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operating results. ITEM 1B . UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS. As of the filing of this annual report on Form 10 K, there were no unresolved comments from the Staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission. 16 Table of Contents ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES.
