CIK: 1196298
Company Name: NEPHROS INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-03-29
Accession Number: 0001144204-11-017998


Item 1 Business Reverse Stock Split On January 10, 2011, our stockholders voted to approve a 120 reverse stock split of our common stock. The reverse split became effective on March 11, 2011 All of the share and per share amounts discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10 K have been adjusted to reflect the effect of this reverse split. Overview Founded in 1997, we are a Delaware corporation that has been engaged primarily in the development of hemodiafiltration, or HDF, products and technologies for treating patients with End Stage Renal Disease, or ESRD. In January 2006, we introduced our new Dual Stage Ultrafilter (the DSU ) water filtration system, which represents a new and complementary product line to our existing ESRD therapy business. We currently have 3 products in various stages of development in the HDF modality to deliver improved therapy to ESRD patients OLp r MDHDF filter series (which we sell in various countries in Europe and currently consists of our MD190 and MD220 diafilters) to our knowledge, the only filter designed expressly for HDF therapy and employing our proprietary Mid Dilution Diafiltrati on technology; OLp r H2H , our add on module designed to allow the most common types of hemodialysis machines to be used for HDF therapy; and OLp r NS2000 system, our stand al1 HDF machine and associated filter technology. We have also developed our OLpur HD 190 high flux dialyzer cartridge, which incorporates the same materials as our OLpur MD series but does not employ our proprietary Mid Dilution Diafiltration technology. Our OLpur HD190 was designed for use with either hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration machines, and received its approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, under Section 510(k) of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, or the FDC Act, in June 2005. OLpur and H2H are among our trademarks for which U.S. registrations are pending. H2H is a registered European Union trademark. We have assumed that the reader understands that these terms are source indicating. Accordingly, such terms appear throughout the remainder of this Annual Report without trademark notices for convenience only and should not be construed as being used in a descriptive or generic sense. We believe that products in our OLpur MDHDF filter series are more effective than any products currently available for ESRD therapy because they are better at removing certain larger toxins (known in the industry as middle molecules because of their heavier molecular weight) from blood. The accumulation of middle molecules in the blood has been related to such conditions as malnutrition, impaired cardiac function, carpal tunnel syndrome, and degenerative b1 disease in the ESRD patient. We also believe that OLpur H2H will, upon introduction, expand the use of HDF as a cost effective and attractive alternative for ESRD therapy, and that, if approved in 2011, our OLpur H2H and MDHDF filters will be the first, and only, HDF therapy available in the United States at that time. We believe that our products will reduce hospitalization, medication and care costs as well as improve patient health (including reduced drug requirements and improved blood pressure profiles), and therefore, quality of life, by removing a broad range of toxins through a more patient friendly, better tolerated process. In addition, independent studies in Europe have indicated that, when compared with dialysis as it is currently offered in the United States, HDF can reduce the patient mortality risk by up to 35%. We believe that the OLpur MDHDF filter series and the OLpur H2H will provide these benefits to ESRD patients at competitive costs and without the need for ESRD treatment providers to make significant capital expenditures in order to use our products. We also believe that the OLpur NS2000 system, if successfully developed, will be the most cost effective stand al1 hemodiafiltration system available. In the first quarter of 2007, we received approval from the FDA for our Investigational Device Exemption ( IDE ) application for the clinical evaluation of our OLp r H2H module and OLp r MD 220 filter. We completed the patient treatment phase of o ur clinical trial during the second quarter of 2008. We submitted our data to the FDA with our 510(k) application on these products in November 2008. Following its review of the application, the FDA requested additional information from us. We replied to the FDA inquiries on March 13, 2009. Prior to March 2010, the FDA did not provide us with any additional requests for information or render a decision on our application. After we made additional inquiries to the FDA about the status of our application, the FDA informed us on March 10, 2010 that our application was still under their review process. 3 On June 30, 2010, we received a final decision letter from the FDA for our 510(k) submission which stated that the FDA could not reach a substantial equivalence determination for our hemodiafiltration (HDF) system. An in person meeting with the FDA took place on September 10, 2010, where the issues raised in the current FDA letter were discussed as well as the process for moving forward. Based upon the meeting with the FDA reviewers and ongoing communication, we are evaluating the appropriate course of future action, which could include filing a new 510(k) application or pursuing dispute resolution related to the current application. We have engaged King & Spalding LLP as regulatory counsel to advise us in our interactions with the FDA. We also intend to utilize the FDA Ombudsman process, as applicable. We have a meeting scheduled with the FDA for April 20, 2011 to discuss a proposal for submission of a new 510(k) application. Depending on the results of that meeting, we currently anticipate proceeding with the submission of a new 510(k) application for approval of our hemodiafiltration system in the U.S. by the third quarter of 2011 which would be subject to the FDA standard 90 day review period. The current decision by the U.S. FDA with regard to our HDF system does not impact our ability to market and sell our mid dilution (MD) filters for hemodiafiltration procedures outside of the U.S. In January 2006, we introduced our new Dual Stage Ultrafilter (the DSU ) water filtration system. Our DSU represents a new and complementary product line to our existing ESRD therapy business. The DSU incorporates our unique and proprietary dual stage filter architecture and is, to our knowledge, the only water filter that allows the user to sight verify that the filter is properly performing its cleansing function. Our research and development work on the OLpur H2H and MD Mid Dilution filter technologies for ESRD therapy provided the foundations for a proprietary multi stage water filter that we believe is cost effective, extremely reliable, and long lasting. We believe our DSU can offer a robust solution to a broad range of contaminated water and disease prevention issues. Hospitals are particularly stringent in their water quality requirements; transplant patients and other individuals whose immune systems are compromised can face a substantial infection risk in drinking or bathing with standard tap water that would generally not present a danger to individuals with normal immune function. The DSU is designed to remove a broad range of bacteria, viral agents and toxic substances, including salm1lla, hepatitis, cholera, HIV, Ebola virus, ricin toxin, legi1lla, fungi and e coli. With nearly 5,800 registered hospitals in the United States al1 (as reported by the American Hospital Association in Fast Facts of December 10, 2010), we believe the hospital shower and faucet market can offer us a valuable opportunity as a first step in water filtration. Due to the ongoing concerns of maintaining water quality, on October 7, 2008, we filed a 510(k) application for approval to market our DSU to dialysis clinics for in line purification of dialysate water. On July 1, 2009, we received FDA approval of the DSU to be used to filter biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate used in hemodialysis procedures. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, we were granted four new patents. In the U.S., we were issued patent #7,534,349 for a Dual Stage Ultrafilter with pump mechanism and or shower feature. In Canada, we were issued patent #2,430,575 for a valve mechanism used in Infusion Fluid systems which is a feature used on our H2H module and patent #2,396,852 for an Ionic Enhanced Dialysis Diafiltration system which is related to mid dilution HDF. In China, we were issued patent #200510092067.3 for a Dual Stage Hemodiafiltration cartridge used in its OLp r MD HDF Filter. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, we were granted six new patents. In the U.S., we were issued patent #7,775,375 for our Dual Stage Ultrafilter (DSU). In Canada, we were issued patents #2,431,431 for a Multistage Hemodiafiltration Hemofiltration Method and Apparatus which forms the basis of our mid dilution technology and patent #2,437,090 for a Method and Apparatus for a Hemodiafiltration Delivery Module which covers our H 2 H Hemodiafiltration device. In Japan, we were issued patents #4623909 and #4436569 for a Sterile Fluid Filtration Cartridge and a Non Isomotic Diafiltration Sytem and Method, respectively. And in Europe, European patent #134787821 was granted for our OLp r MD HDF Filter under the title, Dual Stage Hemodiafiltration cartridge, and whereby individual patents were granted in the countries of Germany, France, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Sweden, and Hong Kong. In 2006, the U.S. Defense Department budget included an appropriation for the U.S. Marine Corps for development of a dual stage water ultra filter. In connection with this Federal appropriation of approximately $1 million, we worked on the development of a personal potable water purification system for use by warfighters. Work on this project was completed in August 2009 and we billed approximately $900,000 during the twenty months ended August 2009. In August 2009, we were awarded a new $18 million research contract from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) for development of a potable dual stage military water purifying filter. The research contract is an expansion of our former ONR contract which is being performed as part of the Marine Corps Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) project. The primary objective of this expanded research program is to select concepts and functional prototype filter pump units which were developed during the first phase of the project, and further develop them into smaller field testable devices that can be used for military evaluation purposes. An advantage of our ultrafilter is the removal of viruses which are not removed with commercially available off the shelf microfilter devices. Such devices generally rely on a secondary chemical disinfection step to make the water safe to drink. The expanded contract also includes research geared toward improving membrane performance, improving device durability, developing larger squad level water purifier devices, and investigating desalination filter pump devices for emergency use purposes. Approximately $846,000 and $423,000 has been billed to this second project during the year ended December 31, 2010 and the four months ended December 31, 2009, respectively. Approximately $1,269,000 of revenue has been recognized on this second project since its beginning in September 2009. During 2010, in response to a Request For Information (RFI) from the U.S. Army, Nephros submitted its UF 40 ultrafilter for consideration as part of the standard issue hydration pack for soldiers in the field. Nephros has been informed by the U.S. Army Public Health Command that its UF 40 filter has been validated to meet the military NSF P248 standard for emergency military operations as a microbiological water purifier. Nephros believes that its UF 40 filter is the only stand al1 filter to date to have met the performance criteria of the NSF P248 standard without secondary disinfection steps. The Army has not to date issued a Request For Proposal (RFP), and Nephros has no information regarding when or if an RFP applicable to the UF 40 ultrafilter may be put forth by the U.S. Army. 4 We have also introduced the DSU to various government agencies as a solution to providing potable water in certain emergency response situations. We have also begun investigating a range of commercial, industrial and retail opportunities for our DSU technology. In March 2010, we entered into a development agreement with STERIS Corporation to jointly develop filtration based products for medical device applications. Nephros received an initial payment upon entering into the agreement and is eligible to receive additional payments upon successful completion of product development milest1s. Going Concern The financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10 K have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, however, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. Our recurring losses and difficulty in generating sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations and sustain our operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We have incurred losses in our operations in each quarter since inception. For the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, we have incurred net losses of $1,933,000 and $2,026,000, respectively. In addition, we have not generated positive cash flow from operations for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009. To become profitable, we must increase revenue substantially and achieve and maintain positive gross and operating margins. If we are not able to increase revenue and gross and operating margins sufficiently to achieve profitability, our results of operations and financial condition will be materially and adversely affected. On October 1, 2010, we issued a senior secured note to Lambda Investors LLC, our largest stockholder, in the principal amount of $500,000. The note bore interest at the rate of 12% per annum and was to mature on April 1, 2011, at which time all principal and accrued interest were due. However, we agreed to and did prepay, without penalty, amounts due under the note with the cash proceeds from our rights offering prior to the maturity date. The note was secured by a first priority lien on all of our property, including our intellectual property. On March 10, 2011 we completed our rights offering and a private placement that together resulted in gross proceeds of approximately $32 million to Nephros. The aggregate net proceeds are estimated to be approximately $23 million, after deducting the estimated aggregate expenses of these transactions, the repayment of the $500,000 note, plus $26,650 of accrued interest thereon, issued to Lambda Investors, LLC, the payment of an 8% sourcing transaction fee ($40,000) in respect of the note and an aggregate of $100,000 for reimbursement of Lambda Investors legal fees incurred in connection with the loan and the rights offering. After giving effect to the 120 reverse stock split on March 11, 2011, our stockholders subscribed for 4,964,854 units in the rights offering and we accepted all basic subscription rights and oversubscription privileges. The units were sold at a per unit purchase price of $0.40. Gross proceeds to us from the sale of these units in the rights offering was approximately $20 million. We issued an aggregate of 4,964,854 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of approximately 4.6 million shares of our common stock to stockholders who subscribed. Simultaneously with the closing of the rights offering, Lambda Investors, LLC purchased in a private placement 3,009,711 units at the same per unit purchase price of $0.40, pursuant to a purchase agreement between us and Lambda Investors. We issued to Lambda Investors an aggregate of 3,009,711 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2,782,579 shares of common stock. We received approximately $12 million in gross proceeds from the sale of units to Lambda Investors. We effected a reverse stock split, in which every 20 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time, which was 500 p.m. on March 11, 2011, were converted into 1 share of common stock. Fractional shares were not issued and stockholders who otherwise would have been entitled to receive a fractional share as a result of the reverse stock split received an amount in cash equal to $0.04 per pre split share for such fractional interests. The number of shares of common stock issued and outstanding was reduced from approximately 201,300,000 pre split to approximately 10,100,000 post split. The reverse stock split was effected in connection with the rights offering and private placement. 5 The reverse stock split was approved by our stockholders at the annual meeting held on January 10, 2011 The number of shares of common stock subject to outstanding stock warrants and options, and the exercise prices and conversion ratios of those securities, were automatically proportionately adjusted for the 1 for 20 ratio provided for by the reverse stock split. There can be no assurance that our future cash flow will be sufficient to meet our obligations and commitments. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our commitments we will be required to adopt alternatives, such as seeking to raise debt or equity capital, curtailing our planned activities or ceasing our operations. There can be no assurance that any such actions could be effected on a timely basis or on satisfactory terms or at all, or that these actions would enable us to continue to satisfy our capital requirements. Current ESRD Therapy Options Current renal replacement therapy technologies include (1) 2 types of dialysis, perit1al dialysis and hemodialysis, (2) hemofiltration and (3) hemodiafiltration, a combination of hemodialysis and hemofiltration. Dialysis can be broadly defined as the process that involves movement of molecules across a semipermeable membrane by diffusion. In hemodialysis, hemofiltration or hemodiafiltration, the blood is exposed to an artificial membrane outside of the body. During Perit1al Dialysis (PD), the exchange of molecules occurs across the membrane lining of the patient perit1al cavity. While there are variations in each approach, in general, the 3 major categories of renal replacement therapy in the marketplace today are defined as follows Dialysis o Perit1al Dialysis , or PD, uses the patient perit1um, the membrane lining covering the internal abdominal organs, as a filter by introducing injectable grade dialysate solution into the perit1al cavity through a surgically implanted catheter. After some period of time, the fluid is drained and replaced. PD is limited in use because the perit1al cavity is subject to scarring with repeated episodes of inflammation of the perit1al membrane, reducing the effectiveness of this treatment approach. With time, a PD patient kidney function continues to deteriorate and perit1al toxin removal al1 may become insufficient to provide adequate treatment. In such case the patient may switch to an extracorporeal renal replacement therapy such as hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration. o Hemodialysis uses an artificial kidney machine to remove certain toxins and fluid from the patient blood while controlling external blood flow and monitoring patient vital signs. Hemodialysis patients are connected to a dialysis machine via a vascular access device. The hemodialysis process occurs in a dialyzer cartridge with a semi permeable membrane which divides the dialyzer into 2 chambers while the blood is circulated through 1 chamber, a premixed solution known as dialysate circulates through the other chamber. Toxins and excess fluid from the blood cross the membrane into the dialysate solution through a process known as diffusion. Hemofiltration is a cleansing process without dialysate solution where blood is passed through a semi permeable membrane, which filters out solute particles through a process known as convection. Hemodiafiltration, or HDF, in its basic form combines the principles of hemodialysis with hemofiltration. HDF uses dialysate solution with a negative pressure (similar to a vacuum effect) applied to the dialysate solution to draw additional toxins from the blood and across the membrane. This process is known as convection. HDF thus combines diffusion with convection, offering efficient removal of small solutes by diffusion, with improved removal of larger substances (i.e., middle molecules) by convection. Hemodialysis is the most common form of extracorporeal renal replacement therapy and is generally used in the United States. Hemodialysis fails, in our opinion, to address satisfactorily the long term health or overall quality of life of the ESRD patient. We believe that the HDF process, which is currently available in our Target European Market and Japan, offers improvement over other dialysis therapies because of better ESRD patient tolerance, superior blood purification of both small and middle molecules, and a substantially improved mortality risk profile. Current Dialyzer Technology used with HDF Systems In our view, treatment efficacy of current HDF systems is limited by current dialyzer technology. As a result of the negative pressure applied in HDF, fluid is drawn from the blood and across the dialyzer membrane along with the toxins removed from the blood. A portion of this fluid must be replaced with a man made injectable grade fluid, known as substitution fluid, in order to maintain the blood proper fluid volume. With the current dialyzer technology, fluid is replaced in 1 of 2 ways pre dilution or post dilution. 6 With pre dilution, substitution fluid is added to the blood before the blood enters the dialyzer cartridge. In this process, the blood can be over diluted, and therefore more fluid can be drawn across the membrane. This enhances removal of toxins by convection. However, because the blood is diluted before entering the device, it actually reduces the rate of removal by diffusion; the overall rate of removal, therefore, is reduced for small molecular weight toxins (such as urea) that rely primarily on diffusive transport. With post dilution, substitution fluid is added to blood after the blood has exited the dialyzer cartridge. This is the currently preferred method because the concentration gradient is maintained at a higher level, thus not impairing the rate of removal of small toxins by diffusion. The disadvantage of this method, however, is that there is a limit in the amount of plasma water that can be filtered from the blood before the blood becomes too viscous, or thick. This limit is approximately 20% to 25% of the blood flow rate. This limit restricts the amount of convection, and therefore limits the removal of middle and larger molecules. The Nephros Mid Dilution Diafiltration Process Our OLpur MDHDF filter series uses a design and process we developed called Mid Dilution Diafiltration, or MDF. MDF is a fluid management system that we believe optimizes the removal of both small toxins and middle molecules by offering the advantages of pre dilution HDF and post dilution HDF combined in a single dialyzer cartridge. The MDF process involves the use of 2 stages in the first stage, blood is filtered against a dialysate solution, therefore providing post dilution hemodiafiltration; it is then overdiluted with sterile infusion fluid before entering a second stage, where it is filtered once again against a dialysate solution, therefore providing pre dilution diafiltration. We believe that the MDF process provides improved toxin removal in HDF treatments, with a resulting improvement in patient health and concurrent reduction in healthcare costs. Our ESRD Therapy Products Our products currently available or in development with respect to ESRD Therapy include OLpur MDHDF Filter Series OLpur MD190 and MD220 constitute our dialyzer cartridge series that incorporates the patented MDF process and is designed for use with existing HDF platforms currently prevalent in our Target European Market and Japan. Our MDHDF filter series incorporates a unique blood flow architecture that enhances toxin removal with essentially no cost increase over existing devices currently used for HDF therapy. Laboratory bench studies have been conducted on our OLpur MD190 by members of our research and development staff and by a third party. We completed our initial clinical studies to evaluate the efficacy of our OLpur MD190 as compared to conventional dialyzers in Montpellier, France in 2003 The results from this clinical study support our belief that OLpur MD190 is superior to post dilution hemodiafiltration using a standard high flux dialyzer with respect to 2 microglobulin clearance. In addition, clearances of urea, creatinine, and phosphate met the design specifications proposed for the OLpur MD190 device. Furthermore, adverse event data from the study suggest that hemodiafiltration with our OLpur MD190 device was well tolerated by the patients and safe. We have initiated longer term clinical studies in the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy and Spain to further demonstrate the therapeutic benefits of our OLpur MDHDF filter series. A multi center study was started in March 2005. This study encompassed seven centers in France, five centers in Germany and 1 center in Sweden. Also commencing in 2005 were studies in the United Kingdom and in Italy. A 3 month study was conducted in Spain. All enrolled patients in the multi center and Spain studies completed the investigational period with the Nephros OLpur MDHDF filter devices. Initial data is very positive, demonstrating improved low molecular weight protein removal, improvements in appetite, an overall improved distribution of fluids and body composition, and optimal toxin removal and treatment tolerance for patients suffering from limited vascular access. Data was presented at the American Society of Nephrology meeting held in November 2006. We contracted with T V Rheinland of North America, Inc., a worldwide testing and certification agency (also referred to as a notified body) that performs conformity assessments to European Union requirements for medical devices, to assist us in obtaining the Conformit Europ ene, or CE mark, a mark which demonstrates compliance with relevant European Union requirements. We received CE marking on the OLpur MD190 (which also covers other dialyzers in our MDHDF filter series), as well as certification of our overall quality system, on July 31, 2003 In the fourth quarter of 2006 we received CE marking on the DSU. During 2010, we replaced T V with BSI America, Inc. as our notified body. In November 2007, the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada, the Canadian health regulatory agency, approved our OLpur MDHDF filter series for marketing in Canada. 7 We initiated marketing of our OLpur MD190 in our Target European Market in March 2004. We have established a sales presence in countries throughout our Target European Market, mainly through distributors, and we have developed marketing material in the relevant local languages. We also attend trade shows where we promote our product to several thousand people from the industry. Our OLpur MD220 is a newer product that we began selling in our Target European Market in 2006. The OLpur MD220 employs the same technology as our OLpur MD190, but contains a larger surface area of fiber. Because of its larger surface area, the OLpur MD220 may provide greater clearance of certain toxins than the OLpur MD190, and is suitable for patients of larger body mass. We are currently offering the OLpur MD190 and OLpur MD220 at a price comparable to the existing high performance dialyzers sold in the relevant market. We are unable at this time to determine what the market prices will be in the future. In the first quarter o f 2007, we received approval from the FDA for our Investigational Device Exemption ( IDE ) application for the clinical evaluation of our OLp r H2H module and OLp r MD 220 filter. We completed the patient treatment phase of our clinical trial during the se cond quarter of 2008. We submitted our data to the FDA with our 510(k) application on these products in November 2008. Following its review of the application, the FDA requested additional information from us. We replied to the FDA inquiries on March 13, 2009. Because the FDA had not provided us with any additional requests for information or rendered a decision on our application, we made additional inquiries to the FDA about the status of our application and, as of March 10, 2010, were informed that our application is still under their review process. On June 30, 2010, we received a final decision letter from the FDA for our 510(k) submission which stated that the FDA could not reach a substantial equivalence determination for our hemodiafiltration (HDF) system. An in person meeting with the FDA took place on September 10, 2010, where the issues raised in the current FDA letter were discussed as well as the process for moving forward. Based upon the meeting with the FDA reviewers and ongoing communication, we are evaluating the appropriate course of future action, which could include filing a new 510(k) application or pursuing dispute resolution related to the current application. We have engaged King & Spalding LLP as regulatory counsel to advise us in our interactions with the FDA. We also intend to utilize the FDA Ombudsman process, as applicable. We intend to use some of the proceeds from our recently completed rights offering to resume our analysis of the best course of action. We have a meeting scheduled with the FDA for April 20, 2011 to discuss a proposal for submission of a new 510(k) application. Depending on the results of that meeting, we currently anticipate proceeding with the submission of a new 510(k) application for approval of our hemodiafiltration system in the U.S. by the third quarter of 2011 which would be subject to the FDA standard 90 day review period. The current decision by the U.S. FDA with regard to our HDF system does not impact our ability to market and sell our mid dilution (MD) filters for hemodiafiltration procedures outside of the U.S. OLpur HD190 OLpur HD190 is our high flux dialyzer cartridge, designed for use with either hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration machines. The OLpur HD190 incorporates the same materials as our OLpur MD190, but lacks our proprietary mid dilution architecture. OLpur H 2 H OLpur H2H is our add on module that converts the most common types of hemodialysis machines that is, those with volumetric ultrafiltration control into HDF capable machines allowing them to use our OLpur MDHDF filter. We have completed our OLpur H2H design and laboratory bench testing, all of which were conducted by members of our research and development staff. Our design verification of the OLpur H2H was completed making the device ready for U.S. clinical trial. We completed the patient treatment phase of our clinical trial during the second quarter of 2008. We submitted our data to the FDA with our 510(k) application on these products in November 2008. Following its review of the application, the FDA requested additional information from us. We replied to the FDA inquiries on March 13, 2009. On June 30, 2010, we received a final decision letter from the FDA for our 510(k) submission which stated that the FDA could not reach a substantial equivalence determination for our hemodiafiltration (HDF) system. An in person meeting with the FDA took place on September 10, 2010, where the issues raised in the current FDA letter were discussed as well as the process for moving forward. Based upon the meeting with the FDA reviewers and ongoing communication, we are evaluating the appropriate course of future action, which could include filing a new 510(k) application or pursuing dispute resolution related to the current application. We have engaged King & Spalding LLP as regulatory counsel to advise us in our interactions with the FDA. We also intend to utilize the FDA Ombudsman process, as applicable. We intend to use some of the proceeds from our recently completed rights offering to resume our analysis of the best course of action. We have a meeting scheduled with the FDA for April 20, 2011 to discuss a proposal for submission of a new 510(k) application. Depending on the results of that meeting, we currently anticipate proceeding with the submission of a new 510(k) application for approval of our hemodiafiltration system in the U.S. by the third quarter of 2011 which would be subject to the FDA standard 90 day review period. The current decision by the U.S. FDA with regard to our HDF system does not impact our ability to market and sell our mid dilution (MD) filters for hemodiafiltration procedures outside of the U.S. 8 OLpur NS2000 OLpur NS2000 is our standal1 HDF machine and associated filter technology, which is in the development stage. The OLpur NS2000 will use a basic HDF platform which will incorporate our H2H technology including our proprietary substitution fluid systems. We have also designed and developed proprietary substitution fluid filter cartridges for use with the OLpur NS2000, which have been subjected to pre manufacturing testing. We will need to obtain the relevant regulatory clearances prior to any market introduction of our OLpur NS2000 in the United States. Our Water Filtration Product In January 2006, we introduced our Dual Stage Ultrafilter, or DSU, water filtration system. The DSU incorporates our unique and proprietary dual stage filter architecture. Our research and development work on the OLpur H2H and MD filter technologies for ESRD therapy provided the foundations for a proprietary multi stage water filter that we believe is cost effective, extremely reliable, and long lasting. We believe our DSU can offer a robust solution to various contaminated water and infection control issues. The DSU is designed to remove a broad range of bacteria, viral agents and toxic substances, including salm1lla, hepatitis, cholera, HIV, Ebola virus, ricin toxin, legi1lla, fungi and e coli. We believe our DSU offers four distinct advantages over competitors in the water filtration marketplace 1) the DSU is, to our knowledge, the only water filter that has the potential to provide the user with a simple sight verification that the filter is properly performing its cleansing function due to our unique dual stage architecture; 2) the DSU filters finer biological contaminants than other filters of which we are aware in the water filtration marketplace; 3) the DSU filters relatively large volumes of water before requiring replacement; and 4) the DSU continues to protect the user even if the flow is reduced by contaminant volumes, because contaminants do not cross the filtration medium. With over 5,700 registered hospitals in the United States al1, we believe the hospital shower and faucet market can offer us a valuable opportunity as a first step in water filtration. We hope to gain a foothold at U.S. and European facilities that seek to become centers of excellence in infection control through the use of our DSU products. Due to the ongoing concerns of maintaining water quality, on October 7, 2008, we filed a 510(k) application for approval to market our DSU to dialysis clinics for in line purification of dialysate water. On July 1, 2009, we received FDA approval of the DSU to be used to filter biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate used in hemodialysis procedures. In 2006, the U.S. Defense Department budget included an appropriation for the U.S. Marine Corps for development of a dual stage water ultra filter. In connection with this Federal appropriation of approximately $1 million, we worked on the development of a personal potable water purification system for use by warfighters. Work on this project was completed in August 2009 and we have billed approximately $900,000 during the twenty months ended August 2009. In August 2009, we were awarded a new $18 million research contract from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) for development of a potable dual stage military water purifying filter. The research contract is an expansion of our former ONR contract which is being performed as part of the Marine Corps Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) project. The primary objective of this expanded research program is to select concepts and functional prototype filter pump units which were developed during the first phase of the project, and further develop them into smaller field testable devices that can be used for military evaluation purposes. An advantage of our ultrafilter is the removal of viruses which are not removed with commercially available off the shelf microfilter devices. Such devices generally rely on a secondary chemical disinfection step to make the water safe to drink. The expanded contract also includes research geared toward improving membrane performance, improving device durability, developing larger squad level water purifier devices, and investigating desalination filter pump devices for emergency use purposes. Approximately $846,000 and $423,000 has been billed to this second project during the year ended December 31, 2010 and the four months ended December 31, 2009, respectively. During 2010, in response to a Request For Information (RFI) from the U.S. Army, Nephros submitted its UF 40 ultrafilter for consideration as part of the standard issue hydration pack for soldiers in the field. Nephros has been informed by the U.S. Army Public Health Command that its UF 40 filter has been validated to meet the military NSF P248 standard for emergency military operations as a microbiological water purifier. Nephros believes that its UF 40 filter is the only stand al1 filter to date to have met the performance criteria of the NSF P248 standard without secondary disinfection steps. The Army has not to date issued a Request For Proposal (RFP), and Nephros has no information regarding when or if an RFP applicable to the UF 40 ultrafilter may be put forth by the U.S. Army. In March 2010, we entered into a development agreement with STERIS Corporation to jointly develop filtration based products for medical device applications. Nephros received an initial payment upon entering into the agreement and is eligible to receive additional payments upon successful completion of product development milest1s. The adoption by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instruments, or AAMI, of more stringent water purity standards for dialysis applications as well as observational studies showing a significant reduction in required erythropoietin dosing when the Nephros DSU is utilized during dialysis therapy has significantly increased interest in the product. We have filed a special 510(k) application for our Small Sterile UltraFilter (also called the Safe Spout filter) and Mega Sterile UltraFilter to enable these products to be used in dialysis applications. We expect to realize accelerating product sales to the U.S. dialysis market as a combined result of these driving factors. We also expect to realize initial sales of DSU products to dialysis markets outside the U.S. in 2011 We have also introduced the DSU to various government agencies as a solution to providing potable water in certain emergency response situations. We have also begun investigating a range of commercial, industrial and retail opportunities for our DSU technology. 9 Our Strategy We believe that current mortality and morbidity statistics, in combination with quality of life issues faced by the ESRD patient, have generated demand for improved ESRD therapies. We also believe that our products and patented technology offer the ability to remove toxins more effectively than current dialysis therapy, in a cost framework competitive with currently available, less effective therapies. We also believe the recent changes resulting from the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act (MIPPA), which sets reimbursement for dialysis treatment costs, lab work and IV drugs into a single bundled rate, will have a positive impact toward the adoption of our products as they have the potential to reduce the amount of IV drugs being administered to dialysis patients. The following are some highlights of our current strategy Showcase Product Efficacy in our Target European Market As of March 2004, we initiated marketing in our Target European Market for the OLpur MD190. There is an opportunity for sales of the OLpur MDHDF filters in our Target European Market because there is an established HDF machine base using disposable dialyzers. We have engaged in a series of clinical trials throughout our Target European Market to demonstrate the superior efficacy of our product. We believe that by demonstrating the effectiveness of our MDHDF filter series we will encourage more customers to purchase our products. Our MDHDF filter series has been applied successfully in over 200,000 treatments to date. Upgrade Fluid Quality feeding Hemodialysis Machines Promote use of our patented Dual Stage Ultrafilter (DSU), which has been cleared by the FDA for use in hemodialysis applications as a water and bicarbonate concentrate ultrafilter, as a means to achieve a lower overall treatment cost under the new bundled reimbursement system. Based on recent observations, we believe a dialysis clinic can lower costs of erythropoietin stimulating agents (ESA), such as Epogen (EPO), by simply installing DSU filters on the incoming water lines feeding their hemodialysis machines. Convert Existing Hemodialysis Machines to Hemodiafiltration Upon completion of the appropriate documentation for our OLpur H2H technology, we plan to apply for Conformit Europ ene, or CE, marking in Europe for our OLpur H2H during 2011 We plan to complete our regulatory approval processes in the United States for both our OLpur MDHDF filter series and our OLpur H2H in 2009. If successfully approved, our OLpur H2H product will enable HDF therapy using the most common types of hemodialysis machines together with our OLpur MDHDF filters. Our goal is to achieve market penetration by offering the OLpur H2H for use by healthcare providers inexpensively, thus permitting the providers to use the OLpur H2H without a large initial capital outlay. We do not expect to generate significant positive margins from sales of OLpur H2H. We believe H2H will provide a basis for more MDHDF filter sales. We believe that, if approved in 2011, our OLpur H2H and MDHDF filters will be the first and only HDF therapy available in the United States at that time. Upgrade Dialysis Clinics to OLpur NS2000 We believe the introduction of the OLpur NS2000 will represent a further upgrade in performance for dialysis clinics by offering a cost effective stand al1 HDF solution that incorporates the benefits of our OLpur H2H technology. We believe dialysis clinics will entertain OLpur NS2000 as an alternative to their current technology at such dialysis clinic machine replacement point. Develop a Foothold in the Healthcare Arena by Offering our DSU as a Means to Control Environment Acquired Infections We believe our DSU offers an effective, and cost effective, solution in conquering certain infection control issues faced by hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities and other patient environments where chemical or heat alternatives have typically failed to adequately address the problem. The DSU provides for simple implementation without large capital expenses. We have established a goal in 2011 to gain a foothold at U.S. and European facilities that seek to become centers of excellence in infection control through the use of our DSU products. Pursue our Military Product Development in Conjunction with Value Adding Partners For our military development, we are engaging with strategic allies who offer added value with respect to both new product and marketing opportunities. 1 of our goals in pursuing this project is to maintain and expand our new product development pipeline and achieve new products suitable for both military and domestic applications. Explore Complementary Product Opportunities Where appropriate, we are also seeking to leverage our technologies and expertise by applying them to new markets, such as currently being d1 under a development contract with STERIS Corporation. Our H2H has potential applications in acute patient care and controlled provision of ultrapure fluids in the field. Our DSU represents a new and complementary product line to our existing ESRD therapy business; we believe the Nephros DSU can offer a robust solution to a broad range of contaminated water and infection control issues. 10 Manufacturing and Suppliers We do not intend to manufacture any of our products or comp1nts. We have entered into an agreement dated May 12, 2003, with a contract manufacturer ( CM ) to assemble and produce our OLpur MD190, MD220 or other filter products at our option. The agreement requires us to utilize this CM to manufacture the OLpur MD190s and MD220s or other filter products that we directly market in Europe, or are marketed by our distributor. In addition, our CM will be given first consideration in good faith for the manufacture of OLpur MD190s, MD220s or other filter products that we do not directly market. No less than semiannually, our CM will provide a report to representatives of both parties to the agreement detailing any technical know how that they have developed that would permit them to manufacture the filter products less expensively and both parties will jointly determine the actions to be taken with respect to these findings. If the fiber wastage with respect to the filter products manufactured in any given year exceeds 5%, then the CM will reimburse us up to half of the cost of the quantity of fiber represented by excess wastage. The CM will manufacture the OLpur MD190 or other filter products in accordance with the quality standards outlined in the agreement. Upon recall of any OLpur MD190 or other filter product due to manufactured products that fail to conform to the required specifications or having failed to manufacture 1 or more products in accordance with any applicable laws, the CM will be responsible for the cost of recall. The agreement also requires that we maintain certain minimum product liability insurance coverage and that we indemnify our CM against certain liabilities arising out of our products that they manufacture, providing they do not arise out of the CM breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct. The term of the current agreement is through May 12, 2010, with successive automatic 1 year renewal terms, until either party gives the other notice that it does not wish to renew at least 90 days prior to the end of the term. The agreement may be terminated prior to the end of the term by either party upon the occurrence of certain insolvency related events or breaches by the other party. Although we have no separate agreement with respect to such activities, our CM has also been manufacturing our H2H filters and DSU in limited quantities. The Company entered into an agreement in December 2003, as amended in June 2005, with a fiber supplier ( FS ), a manufacturer of medical and technical membranes for applications such as dialysis, to continue to produce the fiber for the OLpur MDHDF filter series. Pursuant to the agreement, the FS is the Company exclusive provider of the fiber for the OLpur MDHDF filter series in the European Union as well as certain other territories. On January 18, 2010 the FS notified the Company that it is exercising its right to terminate the supply agreement. Termination of the supply agreement was effective on July 18, 2010. The FS has continued to sell fiber to the Company while negotiations on terms of a new supply agreement have continued. With proceeds from our recently completed rights offering, we intend to resume contract negotiations, which had been put on hold due to our cash needs in 2010. Sales and Marketing We have established a distributor ne2rk to sell ESRD products in our Target European Market and, when regulatory approval is obtained, intend to establish a similar arrangement in the United States. On February 25, 2010, we announced that we signed an exclusive distribution agreement with Bellco Health Care Inc. ( BHC Medical ) to sell and market Nephros OLpurTM MD 220 filter for on line HDF therapy in Canada. Under the terms of the Agreement, Nephros and BHC Medical will work together to promote the sale and distribution of Nephros OLpurTM MD 220 filters through various advertising and promotional campaigns and by working with and training BHC sales and support staff. We have established a customer service and financial processing facility in Dublin, Ireland, available to our customer base in our Target European Market. We have also initiated and completed various clinical studies designed to continue our evaluation of effectiveness of the OLpur MDHDF filters when used on ESRD patients in our Target European Market. These studies are intended to provide us, and have provided us, with valuable information regarding the efficacy of our product and an opportunity to introduce OLpur MDHDF filters to medical institutions in our Target European Market. We are marketing our ESRD products primarily to healthcare providers such as hospitals, dialysis clinics, managed care organizations, and nephrology physician groups. We ship our products to these customers both directly from our manufacturer, where this is cost effective, our distributors, and a public warehouse facility in the U.S. Our New Jersey office oversees sales and marketing activity of our DSU products. We are in discussions with several medical products and filtration products suppliers to act as non exclusive distributors of our DSU products to medical institutions. For each prospective market for our DSU products, we are pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and distribution. In July 2010, we announced a distribution agreement with AmeriWater Corporation and that AmeriWater had adopted the Nephros DSU as a standard comp1nt of its MRO portable reverse osmosis water treatment systems for dialysis. Our DSU manufacturer in Europe shares certain intellectual property rights with us for 1 of our DSU designs. During 2011, we plan to increase our sales and marketing activities in an effort to significantly expand our market presence in the dialysis and infection control arenas. To this end, in March 2011, we engaged Zwolinski Management Consulting to facilitate and reinforce our sales and marketing efforts. Research and Development Our research and development efforts continue on several fronts directly related to our current product lines. We are also working on additional machine devices, next generation user interface enhancements and other product enhancements. In the area of water filtration, we have finalized our initial water filtration product line for the healthcare sector. In 2006, the U.S. Defense Department budget included an appropriation for the U.S. Marine Corps for development of a dual stage water ultra filter. In connection with this Federal appropriation of approximately $1 million, we worked on the development of a personal potable water purification system for use by warfighters. Work on this project was completed in August 2009 and we have billed approximately $900,000 during the twenty months ended August 2009. In August 2009, we were awarded a new $18 million research contract from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) for development of a potable dual stage military water purifying filter. The research contract is an expansion of our former ONR contract which is being performed as part of the Marine Corps Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) project. The primary objective of this expanded research program is to select concepts and functional prototype filter pump units which were developed during the first phase of the project, and further develop them into smaller field testable devices that can be used for military evaluation purposes. An advantage of our ultrafilter is the removal of viruses which are not removed with commercially available off the shelf microfilter devices. Such devices generally rely on a secondary chemical disinfection step to make the water safe to drink. The expanded contract also includes research geared toward improving membrane performance, improving device durability, developing larger squad level water purifier devices, and investigating desalination filter pump devices for emergency use purposes. Approximately $846,000 and $423,000 has been billed to this second project during the year ended December 31, 2010 and the four months ended December 31, 2009, respectively. During 2010, in response to a Request For Information (RFI) from the U.S. Army, Nephros submitted its UF 40 ultrafilter for consideration as part of the standard issue hydration pack for soldiers in the field. Nephros has been informed by the U.S. Army Public Health Command that its UF 40 filter has been validated to meet the military NSF P248 standard for emergency military operations as a microbiological water purifier. Nephros believes that its UF 40 filter is the only stand al1 filter to date to have met the performance criteria of the NSF P248 standard without secondary disinfection steps. The Army has not to date issued a Request For Proposal (RFP), and Nephros has no information regarding when or if an RFP applicable to the UF 40 ultrafilter may be put forth by the U.S. Army. 11 We have also introduced the DSU to various government agencies as a solution to providing potable water in certain emergency response situations. We have also begun investigating a range of commercial, industrial and retail opportunities for our DSU technology. In March 2010, we entered into a development agreement with STERIS Corporation to jointly develop filtration based products for medical device applications. Nephros received an initial payment upon entering into the agreement and is eligible to receive additional payments upon successful completion of product development milest1s. Our research and development expenditures were primarily related to development expenses associated with the H2H machine, STERIS development work and related salary expense for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 and were $362,000 and $280,000, respectively. Competition The dialyzer and renal replacement therapy market is subject to intense competition. Accordingly, our future success will depend on our ability to meet the clinical needs of physicians and nephrologists, improve patient outcomes and remain cost effective for payers. We compete with other suppliers of ESRD therapies, supplies and services. These suppliers include Fresenius Medical Care AG, and Gambro AB, currently 2 of the primary machine manufacturers in hemodialysis. At present, Fresenius Medical Care AG and Gambro AB also manufacture HDF machines. The markets in which we sell our dialysis products are highly competitive. Our competitors in the sale of hemodialysis products include Gambro AB, Baxter International Inc., Asahi Kasei Medical Co. Ltd., Bellco S.p.A., a subsidiary of the Sorin group, B. Braun Melsungen AG, Nipro Corporation Ltd., Nikkiso Co., Ltd., Terumo Corporation and Toray Medical Co., Ltd. Other competitive considerations include pharmacological and technological advances in preventing the progression of ESRD in high risk patients such as those with diabetes and hypertension, technological developments by others in the area of dialysis, the development of new medications designed to reduce the incidence of kidney transplant rejection and progress in using kidneys harvested from genetically engineered animals as a source of transplants. We are not aware of any other companies using technology similar to ours in the treatment of ESRD. Our competition would increase, however, if companies that currently sell ESRD products, or new companies that enter the market, develop technology that is more efficient than ours. We believe that in order to become competitive in this market, we will need to develop and maintain competitive products and take and hold sufficient market share from our competitors. Therefore, we expect our methods of competing in the ESRD marketplace to include continuing our efforts to develop, have manufactured and sell products which, when compared to existing products, perform more efficiently and are available at prices that are acceptable to the market; displaying our products and providing associated literature at major industry trade shows in the United States, our Target European Market and Canada; initiating discussions with dialysis clinic medical directors, as well as representatives of dialysis clinical chains, to develop interest in our products; offering the OLpur H2H at a price that does not provide us with significant positive margins in order to encourage adoption of this product and associated demand for our dialyzers; and pursuing alliance opportunities in certain territories for distribution of our products and possible alternative manufacturing facilities. With respect to the water filtration market, we expect to compete with companies that are well entrenched in the water filtration domain. These companies include Pall Corporation, which manufactures end point water filtration systems, as well as CUNO (a 3M Company) and US Filter (a Siemens business). Our methods of competition in the water filtration domain include 12 developing and marketing products that are designed to meet critical and specific customer needs more effectively than competitive devices; offering unique attributes that illustrate our product reliability, user friendliness, and performance capabilities; selling products to specific customer groups where our unique product attributes are mission critical; and pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and distribution. Intellectual Property Patents We protect our technology and products through patents and patent applications. In addition to the United States, we also applied for patents in other jurisdictions, such as the European Patent Office, Canada and Japan, to the extent we deem appropriate. We have built a portfolio of patents and applications covering our products, including their hardware design and methods of hemodiafiltration. We believe that our patent strategy will provide a competitive advantage in our target markets, but our patents may not be broad enough to cover our competitors products and may be subject to invalidation claims. Our U.S. patents for the Method and Apparatus for Efficient Hemodiafiltration and for the Dual Stage Filtration Cartridge, have claims that cover the OLpur MDHDF filter series and the method of hemodiafiltration employed in the operation of the products. Although there are pending applications with claims to the present embodiments of the OLpur H2H and the OLpur NS2000 products, these products are still in the development stage and we cannot determine if the applications (or the patents that we may issue on them) will also cover the ultimate commercial embodiment of these products. In addition, technological developments in ESRD therapy could reduce the value of our intellectual property. Any such reduction could be rapid and unanticipated. We have applied for patents on our DSU water filtration products to cover various applications in residential, commercial, and remote environments. As of December 2010, we have sixteen issued U.S. patents; 1 issued Eurasian patent; four Mexican patents, four South Korean patents, 3 Russian patents, five Chinese patents, seven French patents, seven German patents, four Israeli patents, six Italian patents, 3 Spanish patents, six United Kingdom patents, nine Japanese patents, 3 Hong Kong patents, and ten Canadian patents. Our issued U.S. patents expire between 2018 and 2026. In addition, we have five pending U.S. patent applications, five pending patent applications in Canada, eight pending patent applications in the European Patent Office, five pending patent applications in Brazil, 2 pending patent applications in China, four pending patent applications in Japan, 3 pending patent applications in Mexico, 1 pending patent application in South Korea, 2 pending patent applications in India, 3 pending patent applications in Israel and 1 pending patent application in Australia. Our pending patent applications relate to a range of dialysis technologies, including cartridge configurations, cartridge assembly, substitution fluid systems, and methods to enhance toxin removal. We also have pending patent applications on our DSU water filtration system, pump filter applications related to our Office of Naval Research project, and means to test filter integrity as part of a liquid purification system. We have filed U.S. and International patent applications for a redundant ultra filtration device that was jointly invented by 1 of our employees and an employee of our CM. We and our CM are negotiating commercial arrangements pertaining to the invention and the patent applications. Trademarks As of December 31, 2010, we secured registrations of the trademarks CENTRAPUR, H2H, OLpur and the Arrows Logo in the European Union. Applications for these trademarks are pending registration in the United States. We also have applications for registration of a number of other marks pending in the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Governmental Regulation The research and development, manufacturing, promotion, marketing and distribution of our ESRD therapy products in the United States, our Target European Market and other regions of the world are subject to regulation by numerous governmental authorities, including the FDA, the European Union and analogous agencies. 13 United States The FDA regulates the manufacture and distribution of medical devices in the United States pursuant to the FDC Act. All of our ESRD therapy products are regulated in the United States as medical devices by the FDA under the FDC Act. Under the FDC Act, medical devices are classified in 1 of 3 classes, namely Class I, II or III, on the basis of the controls deemed necessary by the FDA to reasonably ensure their safety and effectiveness. Class I devices are medical devices for which general controls are deemed sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness. General controls include provisions related to (1) labeling, (2) producer registration, (3) defect notification, (4) records and reports and (5) quality service requirements, or QSR. Class II devices are medical devices for which the general controls for the Class I devices are deemed not sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness and require special controls in addition to the general controls. Special controls include provisions related to (1) performance and design standards, (2) post market surveillance, (3) patient registries and (4) the use of FDA guidelines. Class III devices are the most regulated medical devices and are generally limited to devices that support or sustain human life or are of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health or present a potential, unreasonable risk of illness or injury. Pre market approval by the FDA is the required process of scientific review to ensure the safety and effectiveness of Class III devices. Before a new medical device can be introduced to the market, FDA clearance of a pre market notification under Section 510(k) of the FDC Act or FDA clearance of a pre market approval, or PMA, application under Section 515 of the FDC Act must be obtained. A Section 510(k) clearance will be granted if the submitted information establishes that the proposed device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed Class I or Class II medical device or to a Class III medical device for which the FDA has not called for pre market approval under Section 515. The Section 510(k) pre market clearance process is generally faster and simpler than the Section 515 pre market approval process. We understand that it generally takes four to 12 months from the date a Section 510(k) notification is accepted for filing to obtain Section 510(k) pre market clearance, (but has taken much longer in the case of our OLpur H2H module and OLpur MD 220 filter) and that it could take several years from the date a Section 515 application is accepted for filing to obtain Section 515 pre market approval, although it may take longer in both cases. We expect that all of our ESRD therapy products and our DSU will be categorized as Class II devices and that these products will not require clearance of pre market approval applications under Section 515 of the FDC Act, but will be eligible for marketing clearance through the pre market notification process under Section 510(k). We have determined that we are eligible to utilize the Section 510(k) pre market notification process based upon our ESRD therapy and DSU products substantial equivalence to previously legally marketed devices in the United States. However, we cannot assure you that we will not need to reevaluate the applicability of the Section 510(k) pre market notification process to our ESRD therapy and DSU products in the future; that the FDA will agree with our determination that we are eligible to use the Section 510(k) pre market notification process; or that the FDA will not in the future require us to submit a Section 515 pre market approval application, which would be a more costly, lengthy and uncertain approval process. The FDA has recently been requiring a more rigorous demonstration of substantial equivalence than in the past and may request clinical data to support pre market clearance. As a result, the FDA could refuse to accept for filing a Section 510(k) notification made by us or request the submission of additional information. The FDA may determine that any 1 of our proposed ESRD therapy products is not substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device or that additional information is needed before a substantial equivalence determination can be made. A not substantially equivalent determination, or request for additional data, could prevent or delay the market introduction of our products that fall into this category, which in turn could have a material adverse effect on our potential sales and revenues. Moreover, even if the FDA does clear 1 or all of our products under the Section 510(k) process, it may clear a product for some procedures but not others or for certain classes of patients and not others. For any devices cleared through the Section 510(k) process, modifications or enhancements that could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device or that constitute a major change to the intended use of the device will require a new Section 510(k) pre market notification submission. Accordingly, if we do obtain Section 510(k) pre market clearance for any of our ESRD therapy and DSU products, we will need to submit another Section 510(k) pre market notification if we significantly affect that product safety or effectiveness through subsequent modifications or enhancements. 14 If human clinical trials of a device are required in connection with a Section 510(k) notification and the device presents a significant risk, the sponsor of the trial (usually the manufacturer or distributor of the device) will need to file an IDE application prior to commencing human clinical trials. The IDE application must be supported by data, typically including the results of animal testing and or laboratory bench testing. If the IDE application is approved, human clinical trials may begin at a specific number of investigational sites with a specific number of patients, as specified in the IDE. Sponsors of clinical trials are permitted to sell those devices distributed in the course of the study provided such compensation does not exceed recovery of the costs of manufacture, research, development and handling. An IDE supplement must be submitted to the FDA before a sponsor or investigator may make a change to the investigational plan that may affect its scientific soundness or the rights, safety or welfare of subjects. We submitted our original IDE application to the FDA for our OLpur H2H hemodiafiltration module and OLpur MD220 filter in May 2006. The FDA answered our application with additional questions in June 2006, and we submitted responses to the FDA questions in December 2006. In January 2007, we received conditional approval for our IDE application from the FDA to begin human clinical trials of our OLpur H2H hemodiafiltration module and OLpur MD220 hemodiafilter. In March 2007, we received full approval on our IDE application from the FDA to begin human clinical trials of our OLpur H2H hemodiafiltration module and OLpur MD220 hemodiafilter. We completed the patient treatment phase of our clinical trials during the second quarter of 2008 and filed our 510(k) applications with respect to the OLpur MDHDF filter series and the OLpur H2H module in November 2008. No IDE was required for our DSU product. On July 1, 2009, we received FDA approval of th e DSU to be used to filter biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate used in hemodialysis procedures. We hope to achieve U.S. regulatory approval of ourl OLp r H2H module and OLp r MD 220 filter products during 2011 Following its re view of our OLpur MDHDF filter series and the OLpur H2H module applications, the FDA has requested additional information from us. We replied to the FDA inquiries on March 13, 2009. On June 30, 2010, we received a final decision letter from the FDA for our 510(k) submission which stated that the FDA could not reach a substantial equivalence determination for our hemodiafiltration (HDF) system. An in person meeting with the FDA took place on September 10, 2010, where the issues raised in the current FDA letter were discussed as well as the process for moving forward. Based upon the meeting with the FDA reviewers and ongoing communication, we are evaluating the appropriate course of future action, which could include filing a new 510(k) application or pursuing dispute resolution related to the current application. We have engaged King & Spalding LLP as regulatory counsel to advise us in our interactions with the FDA. We also intend to utilize the FDA Ombudsman process, as applicable. We have a meeting scheduled with the FDA for April 20, 2011 to discuss a proposal for submission of a new 510(k) application. Depending on the results of that meeting, we currently anticipate proceeding with the submission of a new 510(k) application for approval of our hemodiafiltration system in the U.S. by the third quarter of 2011 which would be subject to the FDA standard 90 day review period. The current decision by the U.S. FDA with regard to our HDF system does not impact our ability to market and sell our mid dilution (MD) filters for hemodiafiltration procedures outside of the U.S. The Section 510(k) pre market clearance process can be lengthy and uncertain. It will require substantial commitments of our financial resources and management time and effort. Significant delays in this process could occur as a result of factors including our inability to timely raise sufficient funds; the FDA failure to schedule advisory review panels; changes in established review guidelines; changes in regulations or administrative interpretations; or determinations by the FDA that clinical data collected is insufficient to support the safety and effectiveness of 1 or more of our products for their intended uses or that the data warrants the continuation of clinical studies. Delays in obtaining, or failure to obtain, requisite regulatory approvals or clearances in the United States for any of our products would prevent us from selling those products in the United States and would impair our ability to generate funds from sales of those products in the United States, which in turn could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The FDC Act requires that medical devices be manufactured in accordance with the FDA current QSR regulations which require, among other things, that the design and manufacturing processes be regulated and controlled by the use of written procedures; the ability to produce medical devices which meet the manufacturer specifications be validated by extensive and detailed testing of every aspect of the process; any deficiencies in the manufacturing process or in the products produced be investigated; detailed records be kept and a corrective and preventative action plan be in place; and 15 manufacturing facilities be subject to FDA inspection on a periodic basis to monitor compliance with QSR regulations. If violations of the applicable QSR regulations are noted during FDA inspections of our manufacturing facilities or the manufacturing facilities of our contract manufacturers, there may be a material adverse effect on our ability to produce and sell our products. Before the FDA approves a Section 510(k) pre market notification, the FDA is likely to inspect the relevant manufacturing facilities and processes to ensure their continued compliance with QSR. Although some of the manufacturing facilities and processes that we expect to use to manufacture our ESRD and DSU filters have been inspected and certified by a worldwide testing and certification agency (also referred to as a notified body) that performs conformity assessments to European Union requirements for medical devices, they have not all been inspected by the FDA. Similarly, although some of the facilities and processes that we expect to use to manufacture our OLpur H2H have been inspected by the FDA, they have not all been inspected by any notified body. A notified body is a group accredited and monitored by governmental agencies that inspects manufacturing facilities and quality control systems at regular intervals and is authorized to carry out unannounced inspections. Even after the FDA has cleared a Section 510(k) submission, it will periodically inspect the manufacturing facilities and processes for compliance with QSR. In addition, in the event that additional manufacturing sites are added or manufacturing processes are changed, such new facilities and processes are also subject to FDA inspection for compliance with QSR. The manufacturing facilities and processes that will be used to manufacture our products have not yet been inspected by the FDA for compliance with QSR. We cannot assure you that the facilities and processes used by us will be found to comply with QSR and there is a risk that clearance or approval will, therefore, be delayed by the FDA until such compliance is achieved. In addition to the requirements described above, the FDC Act requires that all medical device manufacturers and distributors register with the FDA annually and provide the FDA with a list of those medical devices which they distribute commercially; information be provided to the FDA on death or serious injuries alleged to have been associated with the use of the products, as well as product malfunctions that would likely cause or contribute to death or serious injury if the malfunction were to recur; and certain medical devices not cleared with the FDA for marketing in the United States meet specific requirements before they are exported. European Union The European Union began to harmonize national regulations comprehensively for the control of medical devices in member nations in 1993, when it adopted its Medical Devices Directive 93 42 EEC. The European Union directive applies to both the manufacturer quality assurance system and the product technical design and discusses the various ways to obtain approval of a device (dependent on device classification), how to properly CE Mark a device and how to place a device on the market. We have subjected our entire business in our Target European Market to the most comprehensive procedural approach in order to demonstrate the quality standards and performance of our operations, which we believe is also the fastest way to launch a new product in the European Community. The regulatory approach necessary to demonstrate to the European Union that the organization has the ability to provide medical devices and related services that consistently meet customer requirements and regulatory requirements applicable to medical devices requires the certification of a full quality management system by a notified body. Initially, we engaged T V Rheinland of North America, Inc. ( T V Rheinland ) as the notified body to assist us in obtaining certification to the International Organization for Standardization, or ISO, 13485 2003 standard, which demonstrates the presence of a quality management system that can be used by an organization for design and development, production, installation and servicing of medical devices and the design, development and provision of related services. European Union requirements for products are set forth in harmonized European Union standards and include conformity to safety requirements, physical and biological properties, construction and environmental properties, and information supplied by the manufacturer. A company demonstrates conformity to these requirements, with respect to a product, by pre clinical tests, biocompatibility tests, qualification of products and packaging, risk analysis and well conducted clinical investigations approved by ethics committees. Once a manufacturer full quality management system is determined to be in compliance with ISO 13485 2003 and other statutory requirements, and the manufacturer products conform with harmonized European standards, the notified body will recommend and document such conformity. The manufacturer will receive a CE marking and ISO certifications, and then may place a CE mark on the relevant products. The CE mark, which stands for Conformit Europ enne, demonstrates compliance with the relevant European Union requirements. Products subject to these provisions that do not bear the CE mark cannot be imported to, or sold or distributed within, the European Union. 16 In July 2003, we received a certification from T V Rheinland that our quality management system conforms with the requirements of the European Community. At the same time, T V Rheinland approved our use of the CE marking with respect to the design and production of high permeability hemodialyzer products for ESRD therapy. In April 2010, we changed our notified body from T V Rheinland to BSI America, Inc. As of the date of filing of this Annual Report, the manufacturing facilities and processes that we are using to manufacture our OLpur MDHDF filter series have been inspected and certified by a notified body. Regulatory Authorities in Regions Outside of the United States and the European Union We also plan to sell our ESRD therapy products in foreign markets outside the United States which are not part of the European Union. Requirements pertaining to medical devices vary widely from country to country, ranging from no health regulations to detailed submissions such as those required by the FDA. We believe the extent and complexity of regulations for medical devices such as those produced by us are increasing worldwide. We anticipate that this trend will continue and that the cost and time required to obtain approval to market in any given country will increase, with no assurance that such approval will be obtained. Our ability to export into other countries may require compliance with ISO 13485, which is analogous to compliance with the FDA QSR requirements. In November 2007, the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada, the Canadian health regulatory agency, approved our OLpur MDHDF filter series for marketing in Canada. Other than the CE marking and Canadian approval of our OLpur MDHDF filter products, we have not obtained any regulatory approvals to sell any of our products and there is no assurance that any such clearance or certification will be issued. Reimbursement In both domestic markets and markets outside of the United States, sales of our ESRD therapy products will depend in part, on the availability of reimbursement from third party payers. In the United States, ESRD providers are reimbursed through Medicare, Medicaid and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, ESRD providers are also reimbursed through governmental and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, the pricing and profitability of our products generally will be subject to government controls. Despite the continually expanding influence of the European Union, national healthcare systems in its member nations, reimbursement decision making included, are neither regulated nor integrated at the European Union level. Each country has its own system, often closely protected by its corresponding national government. Product Liability and Insurance The production, marketing and sale of kidney dialysis products have an inherent risk of liability in the event of product failure or claim of harm caused by product operation. We have acquired product liability insurance for our products in the amount of $5 million. A successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage could materially deplete our assets. Moreover, any claim against us could generate negative publicity, which could decrease the demand for our products, our ability to generate revenues and our profitability. Some of our existing and potential agreements with manufacturers of our products and comp1nts of our products do or may require us (1) to obtain product liability insurance or (2) to indemnify manufacturers against liabilities resulting from the sale of our products. If we are not able to maintain adequate product liability insurance, we will be in breach of these agreements, which could materially adversely affect our ability to produce our products. Even if we are able to obtain and maintain product liability insurance, if a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage is made, then we may have to indemnify some or all of our manufacturers for their losses, which could materially deplete our assets. Employees As of March 31, 2011, we employed a total of 8 employees, 6 of whom were full time and 2 who are employed on a part time basis. We also have engaged 1 consultant on an ongoing basis. Of the 9 total employees and consultants, 2 were employed in a sales marketing customer support capacity, 3 in general and administrative and 4 in research and development. Gerald Kochanski, the Company Chief Financial Officer, served as the acting Chief Executive Officer from March 30, 2010 until April 5, 2010. Since April 6, 2010, Paul A. Mieyal, a member of the Board of Directors, has served as the acting Chief Executive Officer following the resignation of our former President and Chief Executive Officer on March 30, 2010. Dr. Mieyal is a Vice President of Wexford Capital LP, the managing member of Lambda Investors LLC, which is the beneficial owner of approximately 71% of the Company outstanding stock based on common stock and warrants held at March 14, 2011 17 Recent Developments On October 1, 2010, we issued a senior secured note to Lambda Investors LLC, our largest stockholder, in the principal amount of $500,000. The note bore interest at the rate of 12% per annum and was to mature on April 1, 2011, at which time all principal and accrued interest would be due. However, we agreed to and did prepay, without penalty, amounts due under the note with the cash proceeds from our rights offering prior to the maturity date. On March 10, 2010 in connection with the completion of the rights offering as discussed below, the Company repaid in full the $500,000 of principal and $26,650 of accrued interest on the senior secured note issued to Lambda Investors LLC on October 1, 2010. On October 1, 2010, we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a Registration Statement on Form S 1 relating to the proposed rights offering to raise up to $35 million from our existing stockholders. The registration statement was declared effective on January 31, 2011 by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our stockholders subscribed for 496,485 units in the rights offering and we accepted all basic subscription rights and oversubscription privileges. The units were sold at a per unit purchase price of $0.40. Gross proceeds from the sale of these units in the rights offering was approximately $20 million. We issued an aggregate of 4,964,854 shares of its common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of approximately 4.6 million shares of its common stock to stockholders who subscribed. Simultaneously with the closing of the rights offering, Lambda Investors, LLC purchased in a private placement 3,009,711 units at the same per unit purchase price of $0.40, pursuant to a purchase agreement between us and Lambda Investors. We issued to Lambda Investors an aggregate of 3,009,711 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2,782,579 shares of common stock. We received approximately $12 million in gross proceeds from the sale of units to Lambda Investors. The aggregate net proceeds from the rights offering and private placement are estimated to be approximately $23 million, after deducting the estimated aggregate expenses of these transactions, the repayment of the $500,000 note, plus all accrued interest thereon, issued to Lambda Investors, LLC, the payment of an 8% sourcing transaction fee ($40,000) in respect of the note and an aggregate of $100,000 for reimbursement of Lambda Investors legal fees incurred in connection with the loan and the rights offering. On January 10, 2011, our stockholders voted to implement a 120 reverse stock split of our common stock. The reverse split became effective on March 11, 2011 All of the share and per share amounts discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10 K have been adjusted to reflect the effect of this reverse split. In the reverse stock split, every 20 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time, which was 500 p.m. on March 11, 2011, were converted into 1 share of common stock. Fractional shares were not issued and stockholders who otherwise would have been entitled to receive a fractional share as a result of the reverse stock split received an amount in cash equal to $0.04 per pre split share for such fractional interests. The number of shares of our common stock issued and outstanding was reduced from approximately 201,300,000 pre split to approximately 10,100,000 post split. The reverse stock split was effected in connection with the rights offering and private placement.
