CIK: 1196298
Company Name: NEPHROS INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2017-03-20
Accession Number: 0001493152-17-002633


Item 1 Business Overview Nephros is a commercial stage medical device and commercial products company that develops and sells high performance liquid purification filters and hemodiafiltration ( HDF ) systems. Our filters, which are generally classified as ultrafilters, are primarily used in dialysis centers for the removal of biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate, and are used in hospitals for the prevention of infection from water borne pathogens, such as legi1lla and pseudomonas. Because our ultrafilters capture contaminants as small as 0.005 microns in size, they minimize exposure to a wide variety of bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and endotoxins. Our OLp r H2H Hemodiafiltration System, used in conjunction with a standard hemodialysis machine, is the only FDA 510(k) cleared medical device that enables nephrologists to provide hemodiafiltration treatment to patients with end stage renal disease ( ESRD ). Additionally, we sell hemodiafilters, which serve the same purpose as dialyzers in an HD treatment, and other disposables used in the hemodiafiltration treatment process. We were founded in 1997 by healthcare professionals affiliated with Columbia University Medical Center New York Presbyterian Hospital to develop and commercialize an alternative method to hemodialysis ( HD ). We have extended our filtration technologies to meet the demand for liquid purification in other areas, in particular water purification. Our Products Presently, we have 2 core product lines HDF Systems and Ultrafiltration Products. HDF Systems The current standard of care in the United States for patients with chronic renal failure is HD, a process in which toxins are cleared via diffusion. Patients typically receive HD treatment at least 3 times weekly for 3 4 hours per treatment. HD is most effective in removing smaller, easily diffusible toxins. For patients with acute renal failure, the current standard of care in the United States is hemofiltration ( HF ), a process where toxins are cleared via convection. HF offers a much better removal of larger sized toxins when compared to HD. However, HF treatment is performed on a daily basis, and typically takes 12 24 hours. Hemodiafiltration ( HDF ) is an alternative dialysis modality that combines the benefits of HD and HF into a single therapy by clearing toxins using both diffusion and convection. Though not widely used in the United States, HDF is much more prevalent in Europe and is performed in a growing number of patients. Clinical experience and literature show the following clinical and patient benefits of HDF Enhanced clearance of middle and large molecular weight toxins Improved survival up to a 35% reduction in mortality risk Reduction in the occurrence of dialysis related amyloidosis Reduction in inflammation Reduction in medication such as EPO and phosphate binders Improved patient quality of life Reduction in number of hospitalizations and overall length of stay However, like HF, HDF can be resource intensive and can require a significant amount of time to deliver 1 course of treatment. We have developed a modified approach to HDF that we believe is more patient friendly, is less resource intensive, and can be used in conjunction with current HD machines. We refer to our approach as an online mid dilution hemodiafiltration ( mid dilution HDF ) system and it consists of our OLp r H2H Hemodiafiltration Module ( H2H Module ), our OLp r MD 220 Hemodiafilter ( HDF Filter ) and our H2H Substitution Filter ( Dialysate Filter ). The H2H Module utilizes a standard HD machine to perform on line hemodiafiltration therapy. The HD machine controls and monitors the basic treatment functions, as it would normally when providing HD therapy. The H2H Module is a free standing, movable device that is placed next to either side of an HD machine. The H2H Module is connected to the clinic water supply, drain, and electricity. 4 The H2H Module utilizes the HDF Filter and is very similar to a typical hollow fiber dialyzer assembled with a single hollow fiber bundle made with a high flux (or high permeability) membrane. The fiber bundle is separated into 2 discrete, but serially connected blood paths. Dialysate flows in 1 direction that is counter current to blood flow in Stage 1 and co current to blood flow in Stage 2 In addition to the HDF Filter, the H2H Module also utilizes a Dialysate Filter during patient treatment. The Dialysate Filter is a hollow fiber, ultrafilter device that consists of 2 sequential (redundant) ultrafiltration stages in a single housing. During on line HDF with the H2H Module, fresh dialysate is redirected by the H2H Module hydraulic (substitution) pump and passed through this dual stage ultrafilter before being infused as substitution fluid into the extracorporeal circuit. Providing ultrapure dialysate is crucial for the success of on line HDF treatment. Our HDF System is cleared by the FDA to market for use with an ultrafiltration controlled hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of patients with chronic renal failure in the United States. Our on line mid dilution HDF system is the only on line mid dilution HDF system of its kind to be cleared by the FDA to date. In May 2014, DaVita Healthcare Partners initiated an evaluation of our HDF System to treat patients at DaVita North Colorado Springs Clinic. In February 2015, we announced that, in the course of the evaluation, DaVita informed Nephros that they would require additional validation of the system. Nephros and DaVita agreed upon a protocol for the additional validation work which was completed in March 2015. We do not believe that DaVita will restart the evaluation in the near term. In March 2015, we announced that the Renal Research Institute ( RRI ), a research division of Fresenius Medical Care, was conducting an ongoing evaluation of our hemodiafiltration system in its clinic. As of June 2016, our HDF Systems had performed over 1,200 patient treatments. Over the last 18 months of commercial use, we have gathered direct feedback from users of our HDF System to help improve our system and our training methodology. In January 2016, we updated our training procedures and rolled out a software update, which was focused on improving the system alignment with nurse work flow. In June 2016, after approximately 5 months of successfully completed patient treatments with the updated software, we concluded the evaluation project with RRI. Vanderbilt University began treating patients with our HDF Systems early in 2017. Our goal over the next 12 18 months is to develop a better understanding of how our system best fits into the current clinical and economic ESRD treatment paradigm with the ultimate goals of (a) improving the quality of life for the patient, (b) reducing overall expenditure compared to other dialysis modalities, (c) minimizing the impact on nurse work flow at the clinic, and (d) demonstrating the pharmacoeconomic benefit of the HDF technology to the U.S. healthcare system, as has been d1 in Europe with other HDF systems. In addition, we are in the process of developing version 20 of our HDF System, which will enable us to manufacture at scale, as well as potentially reduce the per treatment cost of performing HDF. Ultrafiltration Products Our ultrafiltration products target a number of markets. Hospitals and Other Healthcare Facilities Filtration of water to be used for patient washing and drinking as an aid in infection control. The filters also produce water that is suitable for wound cleansing, cleaning of equipment used in medical procedures and washing of surgeons hands. Dialysis Centers Water Bicarbonate Filtration of water or bicarbonate concentrate used in HD devices. Military and Outdoor Recreation Individual water purification devices used by soldiers and backpackers to produce drinking water in the field, as well as filters customized to remote water processing systems. Commercial Facilities Filtration of water for washing and drinking including use in ice machines and soda fountains. Our Target Markets Hospitals and Other Healthcare Facilities. According to the American Hospital Association approximately 5,700 hospitals, with approximately 915,000 beds, treated over 35 million patients in the United States in 2013 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that healthcare associated infections ( HAI ) occurred in approximately 1 out of every 25 hospital patients. HAIs affect patients in a hospital or other healthcare facility, and are not present or incubating at the time of admission. They also include infections acquired by patients in the hospital or facility but appearing after discharge, and occupational infections among staff. Many HAIs are waterborne bacteria and viruses that can thrive in aging or complex plumbing systems often found in healthcare facilities. The Affordable Care Act, which was passed in March 2010, puts in place comprehensive health insurance reforms that aim to lower costs and enhance quality of care. With its implementation, healthcare providers have substantial incentives to deliver better care or be forced to absorb the expenses associated with repeat medical procedures or complications like HAIs. As a consequence, hospitals and other healthcare facilities are proactively implementing strategies to reduce the potential for HAIs. Our ultrafilters are designed to aid in infection control in the hospital and healthcare setting by treating facility water at the point of delivery, for example, from sinks and showers. 5 On October 28, 2014, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our DSU H and SSU H Ultrafilters as medical devices for use in the hospital setting. The DSU H and SSU H Ultrafilters are intended to be used to filter EPA quality drinking water. The filters retain bacteria, viruses and endotoxin. By providing ultrapure water for patient washing and drinking, the filters aid in infection control. The filters also produce water that is suitable for wound cleansing, cleaning of equipment used in medical procedures and washing of a surgeon hands. The filters are not intended to provide water that can be used as a substitute for United States Pharmacopeia ( USP ) sterile water. In May 2015, we received a warning letter from the FDA resulting from an October 2014 inspection. In the letter, the FDA alleged deficiencies relating to our compliance with the quality system regulation and the medical device reporting regulation. The warning letter did not restrict our ability to manufacture, produce or ship any of our products, nor did it require the withdrawal of any product from the marketplace. In August 2015, we received a subsequent letter from the FDA noting that it had received our response correspondence detailing our completed corrective actions. The corrective actions included revisions to our standard operating procedures relating to purchasing and supplier controls, adverse event reporting, and complaint handling and monitoring. In February 2016, the FDA performed another on site inspection. There were no observations, or 483 s, cited at the conclusion of the inspection. In April 2016, we received a third letter from the FDA noting that the FDA had completed its evaluation of our corrective actions and that, based on its evaluation, it appeared that we had addressed the deficiencies specified in the May 2015 warning letter. In June 2015, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc. ( ASHRAE ) approved Standard 188 2015, Legi1llosis Risk Management for Building Water Systems . We believe the approval of ASHRAE 188 2015 ( S188 ) as a national standard will have a positive impact on point of delivery filtration market. The S188 applies to any human occupied building that is not a single family residence; requires the building to have a plan to control for waterborne infection; requires heat, chemical or both cleaning in the event of a suspected or confirmed presence of legi1lla; and recommends point of use filters in areas of high risk. We are enhancing our efforts to support our distributors by developing and delivering focused sales training to their sales forces on the use of our filters to support an overall program of infection risk prevention; and by, whenever possible, doing joint sales calls with our distributors on potential hospital customers to both serve as a product expert and to field train their sales representatives. In April 2016, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our S100 Point of Use filter. We began shipping our S100 Point of Use in the third quarter of 2016, and ramped up to full production by the end of 2016. In December 2016, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our HydraGuard 10 Ultrafilter. We expect to begin shipping HydraGuard 10 Ultrafilter in the second quarter of 2017, ramping to full production in the third quarter of 2017. In the third quarter of 2017, we expect to launch a flushable version of the HydraGuard 10 Ultrafilter. The complete hospital infection control product line, including in line, point of use and cartridge filters, can be viewed on our website at http www.nephros.com infection control . We are not including the information on our website as a part of, or incorporating it by reference into, this report. Dialysis Centers Water Bicarbonate . To perform hemodialysis, all dialysis clinics have dedicated water purification systems to produce water and bicarbonate concentrate. Water and bicarbonate concentrate are essential ingredients for making dialysate, the liquid that removes waste material from the blood. According to the American Journal of Kidney Diseases, there are approximately 6,300 dialysis clinics in the United States servicing approximately 430,000 patients annually. We estimate that there are over 100,000 hemodialysis machines in operation in the United States. Medicare is the main payer for dialysis treatment in the U.S. To be eligible for Medicare reimbursement, dialysis centers must meet the minimum standards for water and bicarbonate concentrate quality set by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation ( AAMI ), the American National Standards Institute ( ANSI ) and the International Standards Organization ( ISO ). We anticipate that the stricter standards approved by these organizations in 2009 will be adopted by Medicare in the near future. 6 Published studies have shown that the use of ultrapure dialysate can reduce the overall need for erythropoietin stimulating agents ( ESA ), expensive drugs used in conjunction with HD. By reducing the level of dialysate contaminants, specifically cytokine inducing substances that can pass into a patient blood stream, the stimulation of inflammation inducing cytokines is reduced, thus reducing systemic inflammation. When inflammation is low, inflammatory morbidities are reduced and a patient responsiveness to erythropoietin ( EPO ) is enhanced, consequently the overall need for ESAs is reduced. We believe that our DSU D and SSU D ultrafilters are attractive to dialysis centers because they exceed currently approved and newly proposed standards for water and bicarbonate concentrate purity, assist in achieving those standards and may help dialysis centers reduce costs associated with the amount of ESA required to treat a patient. These in line filters are easily installed into the fluid circuits supplying water and bicarbonate concentrate just prior to entering each dialysis machine, or are installed as polishing filters for portable reverse osmosis ( RO ) water systems. In March 2016, we launched the SSUmini product, developed to provide a lower cost ultrafiltration solution for water and bicarbonate flowrates of 0.5 gallons per minutes ( GPM ) or less. The SSUmini can be used as a polish filter for small, portable RO water systems or on bicarbonate concentrate lines in dialysis clinics with centralized bicarbonate concentrate systems. In March 2017, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our EndoPur 10 Endotoxin filter, which is designed to fit in the existing cartridge hosing of a dialysis clinic large RO water system. We expect to begin shipping the EndoPur 10 Endotoxin filter in the second quarter of 2017, and the 20 and 30 versions of the filter by the third quarter of 2017. Military and Outdoor Recreation . Water is a key requirement for the soldier to be fully mission capable. The availability of water supplies and immediate on site water purification is critical to enhance the ability to operate in any environment. Currently, the military is heavily reliant on the use of bottled water to support its soldiers in the field. Bottled water is not always available, is very costly to move, is resource intensive, and is pr1 to constant supply disruptions. Soldiers conducting operations in isolated and rugged terrain must be able to use available local water sources when unable to resupply from bulk drinking water sources or bottled water. Therefore, the soldier needs the capability to purify water from indigenous water sources in the absence of available potable water. Soldiers must have the ability to remove microbiological contaminants in the water to Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) specified levels. We developed our individual water treatment device ( IWTD ) in both in line and point of use configurations. Our IWTD allows a soldier in the field to derive drinking water from any fresh water source. This enables the soldier to remain hydrated, which will maintain mission effectiveness and unit readiness, and extend mission reach. Our IWTD is 1 of the few portable filters that has been validated by the military to meet the NSF Protocol P248 standard. It has also been approved by U.S. Army Public Health Command and U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command for deployment. On May 6, 2015, we entered into a Sublicense Agreement with CamelBak Products, LLC ( CamelBak ). Under this Sublicense Agreement, we granted CamelBak an exclusive, non transferable, worldwide (with the exception of Italy) sublicense and license, in each case solely to market, sell, distribute, import and export the IWTD. In exchange for the rights granted to CamelBak, CamelBak agreed, through December 31, 2022, to pay us a percentage of the gross profit on any sales made to a branch of the U.S. military, subject to certain exceptions, and to pay us a fixed per unit fee for any other sales made. CamelBak is also required to meet or exceed certain minimum annual fees payable to us, and if such fees are not met or exceeded, we may convert the exclusive sublicense to a non exclusive sublicense with respect to non U.S. military sales. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016, we recognized royalty revenue of $10,000 related to the Sublicense Agreement with CamelBak. In 2015, we began working with multiple companies developing portable water purification systems designed to provide potable water in remote locations. Specifically, we have provided flushable filter prototypes to these companies for validation as 1 potential comp1nt in systems that employ multiple technologies to purify water from streams, lakes and rivers. Commercial and Industrial Facilitie s. In 2014, we launched NanoGuard D and NanoGuard S in line ultrafilters for the filtration of water to be used for non medical drinking and washing in non transient non community water systems, or commercial facilities. The NanoGuard D and NanoGuard S trap particulates greater than 0.005 microns in size and can be used as a comp1nt of a facility water treatment system, or to filter water used in ice machines and soda fountains. In November 2015, we announced a strategic partnership with Biocon 1, LLC ( Biocon 1 ). Biocon 1 AETHER Water Systems technology, which includes patented water filtration media and water filtration products, provides solutions for customers to address all contaminate issues and to provide clean tasting, sediment free, scale free, and bacteria free water for the food service industry. AETHER Water Systems are used with ice machines, coffee stations, and soda fountains in hotels, casual dining restaurants, fast food restaurants and convenience stores. As part of the collaboration, we have access to Biocon 1 anti scale and related water filtration technology to develop filter products for the medical industry. In March 2016, we shipped the first lot of filter cartridges to Biocon 1 for inclusion with its AETHER line of filtration products. 7 While our EndoPur TM ultrafilter cartridge platform was designed initially for use in the dialysis setting, we are working with our distributors to identify other opportunities for our ultrafilters to provide value to customers in multiple commercial and industrial settings. The NanoGuard C, a cartridge ultrafilter that inserts into standard 10 , 20 , 30 and 40 housings, is now available; and we expect that the NanoGuard F, a flushable cartridge ultrafilter available in 10 and 20 sizes, will be available for broad distribution in the second quarter of 2017. Many potential customers in the commercial and industrial space currently utilize an Everpure manifold system. The NanoGuard E, a version of our ultrafilter that plugs into an Everpure housing system, is now available. Over the last few years, we have been developing a high throughput, auto flushing filter system capable of handling 25 GPM, or greater, through our proprietary 0.005 micron fiber membrane. The flushable filter system is designed to remove submicron particulates in closed loop water systems, including cooling systems for data centers and hot water return loops in commercial buildings. Initial data suggests the ability to remove both organic and inorganic particulates. We have released a limited number of systems to specific customers for additional testing and validation. Small, flushable 25 and 5 GPM filter systems have potential utility as a point of entry water purification system in restaurants, convenience stores and households. We offered flushable systems to a limited set of customers in 2016, and expect to offer these system to a broad set of commercial and industrial customers starting in the second quarter of 2017. In the third quarter of 2017, we expect to launch a lead filtration system that will address both soluble and particulate lead in potable water, with the ability to treat up to 10,000 gallons of water between filter change outs. Going forward, as we grow our water filtration business, we will be exploring opportunities for new applications for our filter products and will be open to evaluating new potential partnerships to expand our water filtration foot print. Our strategic distribution partners who place our filters in hospitals and medical facilities, also support a wide range of commercial and industrial customers. We believe that our existing distributor relationships will facilitate growth in filter sales outside of the medical industry. Corporate Information We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware in April 1997. Our principal executive offices are located at 41 Grand Avenue, River Edge, New Jersey, 07661, and our teleph1 number is (201) 343 5202 We also have an office in Dublin, Ireland. For more information about Nephros, please visit our website at www.nephros.com . Going Concern The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. Our recurring losses and difficulty in generating sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations and sustain our operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We have incurred significant losses in operations in each quarter since inception. In addition, we did not generate positive cash flow from operations for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015. To become profitable, we must increase revenue substantially and achieve and maintain positive gross and operating margins. If we are not able to increase revenue and gross and operating margins sufficiently to achieve profitability, our results of operations and financial condition will be materially and adversely affected. There can be no assurance that our future cash flow will be sufficient to meet our obligations and commitments. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our commitments, we will be required to adopt alternatives, such as seeking to raise debt or equity capital, curtailing our planned activities or ceasing our operations. There can be no assurance that any such actions could be effected on a timely basis or on satisfactory terms or at all, or that these actions would enable us to continue to satisfy our capital requirements. Manufacturing and Suppliers We do not, and do not intend to in the near future, manufacture any of our products and comp1nts. With regard to the OLp r MD190 and MD220, on June 27, 2011, we entered into a license agreement, effective July 1, 2011, as amended by the first amendment dated February 19, 2014, with Bellco S.r.l. ( Bellco ), an Italy based supplier of hemodialysis and intensive care products, for the manufacturing, marketing and sale of our patented mid dilution dialysis filters (MD190, MD220). Pursuant to the First Amendment, we and Bellco agreed to extend the term of the License Agreement from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2021 In addition, under the agreement, as amended by the first amendment, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell these products under its own name, label and CE mark in Italy, France, Belgium, Spain, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden on an exclusive basis, and to do the same on a non exclusive basis in the United Kingdom, Greece, Brazil, China, Korea, Mexico and the Netherlands and, upon our written approval, other European countries where we do not sell these products as well as non European countries. In April 2012, we entered into a license and supply agreement with Medica S.p.A., an Italy based medical product manufacturing company, for the marketing and sale of certain filtration products based upon Medica proprietary Medisulf1 ultrafiltration technology in conjunction with our filtration products, and to engage in an exclusive supply arrangement for the filtration products. Under the license and supply Agreement, Medica granted to us an exclusive license, with right of sublicense, to market, promote, distribute, offer for sale and sell the filtration products worldwide, excluding Italy, during the term of the agreement. 8 Sales and Marketing Under the Bellco license agreement, as discussed above, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell the covered products under its own name, label and CE mark in the territory, as defined in the license agreement. In addition, if requested by us, Bellco will be required to sell the covered products to our distributors in the stated territory. Our New Jersey office oversees global sales and marketing activity of our ultrafilter products. We work with multiple distributors for our ultrafilter products in the dialysis water market and the hospital water market. In the food service market, Biocon 1 has the exclusive right to distribute our custom filter cartridge developed for the AETHER Water System. For each prospective market for our ultrafilter products, we are pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and or distribution. Our ultrafilter manufacturer in Europe shares certain intellectual property rights with us for 1 of our Dual Stage Ultrafilter ( DSU ) designs. Research and Development Our research and development efforts continue on several fronts directly related to our current product lines. On the water filter business, we are continually working with existing and potential distributors of ultrafilter products to develop solutions to meet customer needs. On the HDF System business, we are working with our current customers to develop version 20 of the HDF System. For the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, we spent approximately $1,079,000 and $826,000, respectively, on research and development activities. Major Customers For the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, four customers accounted for 55% and 67%, respectively, of our revenues. As of December 31, 2016 and 2015, four customers accounted for 59% and 73%, respectively, of our accounts receivable. Competition With respect to the water filtration market, we expect to compete with companies that are well entrenched in the water filtration domain. These companies include Pall Corporation (now wholly owned by Danaher Corporation), which manufactures end point water filtration systems, as well as 3M, Siemens and Everpure . Our methods of competition in the water filtration domain include developing and marketing products that are designed to meet critical and specific customer needs more effectively than competitive devices; offering unique attributes that illustrate our product reliability, user friendliness, and performance capabilities; selling products to specific customer groups where our unique product attributes are mission critical; and pursuing alliance opportunities for joint product development and distribution. The dialyzer and renal replacement therapy market is subject to intense competition. Accordingly, our future success will depend on our ability to meet the clinical goals of nephrologists, improve patient outcomes and remain cost effective for payers. We compete with other suppliers of ESRD therapies, supplies and services. These suppliers include Fresenius Medical Care AG and Baxter International Inc., currently 2 of the primary machine manufacturers in hemodialysis. At present, Fresenius Medical Care AG and Baxter International Inc. also manufacture HDF machines that are not currently approved in the United States. The markets in which we sell our dialysis products are highly competitive. Our competitors in the sale of hemodialysis products include Baxter International Inc., Fresenius Medical Care AG, Asahi Kasei Medical Co. Ltd., B. Braun Melsungen AG, Nipro Medical Corporation Ltd., Nikkiso Co., Ltd., Terumo Medical Corporation and Toray Medical Co., Ltd. Other competitive considerations include pharmacological and technological advances in preventing the progression of ESRD in high risk patients such as those with diabetes and hypertension, technological developments by others in the area of dialysis, the development of new medications designed to reduce the incidence of kidney transplant rejection and progress in using kidneys harvested from genetically engineered animals as a source of transplants. 9 We are not aware of any other companies using technology similar to ours in the treatment of ESRD. Our competition would increase, however, if companies that currently sell ESRD products, or new companies that enter the market, develop technology that is more efficient than ours. We believe that in order to become competitive in this market, we will need to develop and maintain competitive products and take and hold sufficient market share from our competitors. Therefore, we expect our methods of competing in the ESRD marketplace to include continuing our efforts to develop, have manufactured and sell products which, when compared to existing products, perform more efficiently and are available at prices that are acceptable to the market; displaying our products and providing associated literature at major industry trade shows in the United States; initiating discussions with dialysis clinic medical directors, as well as representatives of dialysis clinical chains, to develop interest in our products; pursuing alliance opportunities in certain territories for distribution of our products and possible alternative manufacturing facilities; and entering into license agreements similar to the Bellco agreement to expand market share. Intellectual Property Patents We protect our technology and products through patents and patent applications. In addition to the United States, we also applied for patents in other jurisdictions, such as the European Patent Office, Canada and Japan, to the extent we deem appropriate. We have built a portfolio of patents and applications covering our products, including their hardware design and methods of hemodiafiltration. We believe that our patent strategy will provide a competitive advantage in our target markets, but our patents may not be broad enough to cover our competitors products and may be subject to invalidation claims. Our U.S. patents for the Method and Apparatus for Efficient Hemodiafiltration and for the Dual Stage Filtration Cartridge have claims that cover the OLpur MDHDF filter series and the method of hemodiafiltration employed in the operation of the products. Technological developments in ESRD therapy could reduce the value of our intellectual property. Any such reduction could be rapid and unanticipated. We have issued patents on our water filtration products and applications in process to cover various applications in residential, commercial, and remote environments. As of December 31, 2016, we have twenty 3 issued U.S. patents, 1 issued Eurasian patent, seven Mexican patents, four South Korean patents, 3 Russian patents, six Chinese patents, nine French patents, nine German patents, five Israeli patents, seven Italian patents, 3 Spanish patents, nine United Kingdom patents, fourteen Japanese patents, 3 Hong Kong patents, ten Canadian patents, 1 Australian patent, 2 patents in Brazil, 1 patent in Sweden and 1 patent in the Netherlands. Our issued U.S. patents expire between 2018 and 2033 In addition, we have 2 pending patent applications in Canada, 2 pending patent applications in the European Patent Office, and 1 pending patent application in Brazil. Our pending patent applications relate to a range of filter technologies, including cartridge configurations, cartridge assembly, substitution fluid systems, and methods to enhance and ensure performance. Trademarks As of December 31, 2016, we secured registrations of the trademarks H2H and OLp r in the European Union and OLp r in the United States. We have also filed trademark applications for PATHOGUARD, NANOGUARD, and ENDOPUR in the United States and the European Union. Governmental Regulation The research and development, manufacturing, promotion, marketing and distribution of our ESRD therapy products in the United States, Europe and other regions of the world are subject to regulation by numerous governmental authorities, including the FDA, the European Union and analogous agencies. 10 United States The FDA regulates the manufacture and distribution of medical devices in the United States pursuant to the FDC Act. All of our ESRD therapy products are regulated in the United States as medical devices by the FDA under the FDC Act. Under the FDC Act, medical devices are classified in 1 of 3 classes, namely Class I, II or III, on the basis of the controls deemed necessary by the FDA to reasonably ensure their safety and effectiveness. Class I devices are medical devices for which general controls are deemed sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness. General controls include provisions related to (1) labeling, (2) producer registration, (3) defect notification, (4) records and reports and (5) quality service requirements ( QSR ). Class II devices are medical devices for which the general controls for the Class I devices are deemed not sufficient to ensure their safety and effectiveness and require special controls in addition to the general controls. Special controls include provisions related to (1) performance and design standards, (2) post market surveillance, (3) patient registries and (4) the use of FDA guidelines. Class III devices are the most regulated medical devices and are generally limited to devices that support or sustain human life or are of substantial importance in preventing impairment of human health or present a potential, unreasonable risk of illness or injury. Pre market approval by the FDA is the required process of scientific review to ensure the safety and effectiveness of Class III devices. Before a new medical device can be introduced to the market, FDA clearance of a pre market notification under Section 510(k) of the FDC Act or FDA clearance of a pre market approval, or PMA, application under Section 515 of the FDC Act must be obtained. A Section 510(k) clearance will be granted if the submitted information establishes that the proposed device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed Class I or Class II medical device or to a Class III medical device for which the FDA has not called for pre market approval under Section 515. The Section 510(k) pre market clearance process is generally faster and simpler than the Section 515 pre market approval process. For any devices cleared through the Section 510(k) process, modifications or enhancements that could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device or that constitute a major change to the intended use of the device will require a new Section 510(k) pre market notification submission. Accordingly, if we do obtain Section 510(k) pre market clearance for any of our ESRD therapy and DSU products, we will need to submit another Section 510(k) pre market notification if we significantly affect that product safety or effectiveness through subsequent modifications or enhancements. In July 2009, we received FDA clearance of the DSU to be used to filter biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate used in hemodialysis procedures. In April 2012, we announced that 510(k) clearance was received from the FDA to market the OLp r H2H Module and OLp r MD 220 Hemodiafilter for use with a UF controlled hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of patients with chronic renal failure in the United States. In October 2014, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our DSU H and SSU H Ultrafilters; in April 2016, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our S100 Point of Use Filter; in December 2016, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our HydraGuard 10 Ultrafilter; and in March 2017, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market our EndoPur 10 Endotoxin. The FDC Act requires that medical devices be manufactured in accordance with the FDA current QSR regulations which require, among other things, that the design and manufacturing processes be regulated and controlled by the use of written procedures; the ability to produce medical devices which meet the manufacturer specifications be validated by extensive and detailed testing of every aspect of the process; any deficiencies in the manufacturing process or in the products produced be investigated; detailed records be kept and a corrective and preventative action plan be in place; and manufacturing facilities be subject to FDA inspection on a periodic basis to monitor compliance with QSR regulations. If violations of the applicable QSR regulations are noted during FDA inspections of our manufacturing facilities or the manufacturing facilities of our contract manufacturers, there may be a material adverse effect on our ability to produce and sell our products. 11 In addition to the requirements described above, the FDC Act requires that all medical device manufacturers and distributors register with the FDA annually and provide the FDA with a list of those medical devices which they distribute commercially; information be provided to the FDA on death or serious injuries alleged to have been associated with the use of the products, as well as product malfunctions that would likely cause or contribute to death or serious injury if the malfunction were to recur; and certain medical devices not cleared with the FDA for marketing in the United States meet specific requirements before they are exported. European Union The European Union began to harmonize national regulations comprehensively for the control of medical devices in member nations in 1993, when it adopted its Medical Devices Directive 93 42 EEC. The European Union directive applies to both the manufacturer quality assurance system and the product technical design and discusses the various ways to obtain approval of a device (dependent on device classification), how to properly CE Mark a device and how to place a device on the market. The regulatory approach necessary to demonstrate to the European Union that the organization has the ability to provide medical devices and related services that consistently meet customer requirements and regulatory requirements applicable to medical devices requires the certification of a full quality management system by a notified body. Initially, we engaged T V Rheinland of North America, Inc. ( T V Rheinland ) as the notified body to assist us in obtaining certification to the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ), 13485 2003 standard, which demonstrates the presence of a quality management system that can be used by an organization for design and development, production, installation and servicing of medical devices and the design, development and provision of related services. European Union requirements for products are set forth in harmonized European Union standards and include conformity to safety requirements, physical and biological properties, construction and environmental properties, and information supplied by the manufacturer. A company demonstrates conformity to these requirements, with respect to a product, by pre clinical tests, biocompatibility tests, qualification of products and packaging, risk analysis and well conducted clinical investigations approved by ethics committees. Once a manufacturer full quality management system is determined to be in compliance with ISO 13485 2003 and other statutory requirements, and the manufacturer products conform to harmonized European standards, the notified body will recommend and document such conformity. The manufacturer will receive a CE marking and ISO certifications, and then may place a CE mark on the relevant products. The CE mark, which stands for Conformit Europ enne, demonstrates compliance with the relevant European Union requirements. Products subject to these provisions that do not bear the CE mark cannot be imported to, or sold or distributed within, the European Union. In July 2003, we received a certification from T V Rheinland that our quality management system conforms to the requirements of the European Community. At the same time, T V Rheinland approved our use of the CE marking with respect to the design and production of high permeability hemodialyzer products for ESRD therapy. In April 2010, we changed our notified body from T V Rheinland to BSI America, Inc. and expanded our scope to include design and development and production of water filters. Under the Bellco license agreement, as discussed above, we granted Bellco a license to manufacture, market and sell the covered products under its own name, label and CE mark in the stated territory. In addition, if requested by us, Bellco will be required to sell the covered products to our distributors in the stated territory. Regulatory Authorities in Regions Outside of the United States and the European Union We also plan to sell our ESRD therapy products in foreign markets outside the United States that are not part of the European Union. Requirements pertaining to medical devices vary widely from country to country, ranging from no health regulations to detailed submissions such as those required by the FDA. We believe the extent and complexity of regulations for medical devices such as those produced by us are increasing worldwide. We anticipate that this trend will continue and that the cost and time required to obtain approval to market in any given country will increase, with no assurance that such approval will be obtained. Our ability to export into other countries may require compliance with ISO 13485, which is analogous to compliance with the FDA QSR requirements. In November 2007 and May 2011, the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada, the Canadian health regulatory agency, approved our OLp r MD220 Hemodiafilter and our DSU, respectively, for marketing in Canada. Other than the Canadian approval of our OLp r MD220 Hemodiafilter and DSU products, we have not obtained any regulatory approvals to sell any of our products outside of the United States and the European Union and there is no assurance that any such clearance or certification will be issued. 12 Reimbursement In both domestic markets and markets outside of the United States, sales of our ESRD therapy products will depend in part, on the availability of reimbursement from third party payers. In the United States, ESRD providers are reimbursed through Medicare, Medicaid and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, ESRD providers are also reimbursed through governmental and private insurers. In countries other than the United States, the pricing and profitability of our products generally will be subject to government controls. Despite the continually expanding influence of the European Union, national healthcare systems in its member nations, including reimbursement decision making, are neither regulated nor integrated at the European Union level. Each country has its own system, often closely protected by its corresponding national government. Product Liability and Insurance The production, marketing and sale of our products have an inherent risk of liability in the event of product failure or claim of harm caused by product operation. We have acquired product liability insurance for our products in the amount of $2 million. A successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage could materially deplete our assets. Moreover, any claim against us could generate negative publicity, which could decrease the demand for our products, our ability to generate revenues and our profitability. Some of our existing and potential agreements with manufacturers of our products and comp1nts of our products do or may require us (1) to obtain product liability insurance or (2) to indemnify manufacturers against liabilities resulting from the sale of our products. If we are not able to maintain adequate product liability insurance, we will be in breach of these agreements, which could materially adversely affect our ability to produce our products. Even if we are able to obtain and maintain product liability insurance, if a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage is made, then we may have to indemnify some or all of our manufacturers for their losses, which could materially deplete our assets. Employees As of December 31, 2016, we employed a total of 10 employees, 9 of whom are full time and 1 who is employed on a part time basis. We also have engaged 2 consultants on an ongoing basis. Of the 12 total employees and consultants, 3 are employed in a sales marketing customer support capacity, 4 in general and administrative and 5 in research and development. 13 Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Company The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. Our recurring losses and difficulty in generating sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations and sustain our operations raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, and our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Based on our current cash flow projections and the approximately $12M raised in a PIPE offering in March 2017 and projected increase in product sales from the launch of new products we may be able to fund our operations at least into 2018, if not longer, depending on the timing and market acceptance of our new products. As a result, we will need to raise additional funds through either the licensing or sale of our technologies or the additional public or private offerings of our securities. However, there is no guarantee that we will be able to obtain further financing, or do so on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional funds on a timely basis, or at all, we may be required to cease operations. We have a history of operating losses and a significant accumulated deficit, and we may not achieve or maintain profitability in the future. As of December 31, 2016, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $120,285,000, as a result of historical operating losses. While we believe that the revenues following the launch of our new products will help us achieve profitability, there can be no guarantee, We may continue to incur additional losses in the future depending on the timing and marketplace acceptance of our new products and as a result of operating expenses being higher than our gross margin from product sales. We began sales of our first product in March 2004, and we may never realize sufficient revenues from the sale of our products or be profitable. Each of the following factors, among others, may influence the timing and extent of our profitability, if any the market acceptance of our technologies and products in each of our target markets; our ability to effectively and efficiently manufacture, market and distribute our products; our ability to sell our products at competitive prices that exceed our per unit costs; and our ability to continue to develop products and maintain a competitive advantage in our industry. If we violate any provisions of the FDC Act or any other statutes or regulations, then we could be subject to enforcement actions by the FDA or other governmental agencies. We face a significant compliance burden under the FDC Act and other applicable statutes and regulations which govern the testing, labeling, storage, record keeping, distribution, sale, marketing, advertising and promotion of our medically approved products. On May 28, 2015, we received a warning letter from the FDA resulting from an October 2014 inspection. In the letter, the FDA alleged deficiencies relating to our compliance with the quality system regulation and the medical device reporting regulation. The warning letter did not restrict our ability to manufacture, produce or ship any of our products, nor did it require the withdrawal of any product from the marketplace. On August 12, 2015, we received a subsequent letter from the FDA noting that it had received our response correspondence detailing our completed corrective actions. The corrective actions included revisions to our standard operating procedures relating to purchasing and supplier controls, adverse event reporting, and complaint handling and monitoring. In February 2016, the FDA performed another on site inspection. There were no observations, or 483 s, cited at the conclusion of the inspection. In April 2016, we received a third letter from the FDA noting that the FDA had completed its evaluation of our corrective actions and that, based on its evaluation, it appeared that we had addressed the deficiencies specified in the May 2015 warning letter. 14 If we violate the FDC Act or other regulatory requirements (either with respect to our POU or DSU ultrafilters or otherwise) at any time during or after the product development and or approval process, we could be subject to enforcement actions by the FDA or other agencies, including fines; injunctions; civil penalties; recalls or seizures of products; total or partial suspension of the production of our products; withdrawal of any existing approvals or pre market clearances of our products; refusal to approve or clear new applications or notices relating to our products; recommendations that we not be allowed to enter into government contracts; and criminal prosecution. Any of the above could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. We cannot assure you that our products will be safe or that there will not be product related deaths, serious injuries or product malfunctions. Further, we are required under applicable law to report any circumstances relating to our medically approved products that could result in deaths or serious injuries. These circumstances could trigger recalls, class action lawsuits and other events that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from such products. We cannot assure you that our products will prove to be safe or that there will not be product related deaths or serious injuries or product malfunctions, which could trigger recalls, class action lawsuits and other events that could cause us to incur significant expenses, limit our ability to market our products and generate revenues from such products or cause us reputational harm. Under the FDC Act, we are required to submit medical device reports ( MDRs ) to the FDA to report device related deaths, serious injuries and malfunctions of medically approved products that could result in death or serious injury if they were to recur. Depending on their significance, MDRs could trigger events that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from such products, such as the following information contained in the MDRs could trigger FDA regulatory actions such as inspections, recalls and patient physician notifications; because the reports are publicly available, MDRs could become the basis for private lawsuits, including class actions; and if we fail to submit a required MDR to the FDA, the FDA could take enforcement action against us. If any of these events occur, then we could incur significant expenses and it could become more difficult for us to market and sell our products and to generate revenues from sales. Other countries may impose analogous reporting requirements that could cause us to incur expenses and may also limit our ability to generate revenues from sales of our products. Product liability associated with the production, marketing and sale of our products, and or the expense of defending against claims of product liability, could materially deplete our assets and generate negative publicity which could impair our reputation. The production, marketing and sale of kidney dialysis and water filtration products have inherent risks of liability in the event of product failure or claim of harm caused by product operation. Voluntary recalls could subject us to claims or proceedings by consumers, the FDA or other regulatory authorities which may adversely impact our sales and revenues. Furthermore, even meritless claims of product liability may be costly to defend against. Although we have acquired product liability insurance for our products, we may not be able to maintain or obtain this insurance on acceptable terms or at all. Because we may not be able to obtain insurance that provides us with adequate protection against all potential product liability claims, a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage could materially deplete our assets. Moreover, even if we are able to obtain adequate insurance, any claim against us could generate negative publicity, which could impair our reputation and adversely affect the demand for our products, our ability to generate sales and our profitability. Some of the agreements that we may enter into with manufacturers of our products and comp1nts of our products may require us to obtain product liability insurance; or to indemnify manufacturers against liabilities resulting from the sale of our products. 15 For example, the agreement with our contract manufacturer ( CM ) requires that we obtain and maintain certain minimum product liability insurance coverage and that we indemnify our CM against certain liabilities arising out of our products that they manufacture, provided they do not arise out of our CM breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct. If we are not able to obtain and maintain adequate product liability insurance, then we could be in breach of these agreements, which could materially adversely affect our ability to produce our products and generate revenues. Even if we are able to obtain and maintain product liability insurance, if a successful claim in excess of our insurance coverage is made, then we may have to indemnify some or all of our manufacturers for their losses, which could materially deplete our assets. We face significant challenges in obtaining market acceptance of our products, which could adversely affect our potential sales and revenues. We do not yet have an established market or customer base for our products. Acceptance of our products in the marketplace by both potential users, including chronic renal failure patients, and potential purchasers, including nephrologists, dialysis clinics and other health care providers, is uncertain, and our failure to achieve sufficient market acceptance will significantly limit our ability to generate revenue and be profitable. Market acceptance will require substantial marketing efforts and the expenditure of significant funds by us to inform dialysis patients and nephrologists, dialysis clinics and other health care providers of the benefits of using our products. We may encounter significant clinical and market resistance to our products and our products may never achieve market acceptance. We may not be able to build key relationships with physicians, clinical groups and government agencies, pursue or increase sales opportunities in Europe or elsewhere, or be the first to introduce hemodiafiltration therapy in the United States. Product orders may be cancelled, patients or customers currently using our products may cease to do so and patients or customers expected to begin using our products may not. Factors that may affect our ability to achieve acceptance of our chronic renal failure therapy products in the marketplace include whether such products will be safe for use; such products will be effective; such products will be cost effective; we will be able to demonstrate product safety, efficacy and cost effectiveness; there are unexpected side effects, complications or other safety issues associated with such products; and government or third party reimbursement for the cost of such products is available at reasonable rates, if at all. Acceptance of our water filtration products in the marketplace is also uncertain, and our failure to achieve sufficient market acceptance and sell such products at competitive prices will limit our ability to generate revenue and be profitable. Our water filtration products and technologies may not achieve expected reliability, performance and endurance standards. Our water filtration products and technology may not achieve market acceptance, including among hospitals, or may not be deemed suitable for other commercial, military, industrial or retail applications. Many of the same factors that may affect our ability to achieve acceptance of our chronic renal failure therapy products in the marketplace will also apply to our water filtration products, except for those related to side effects, clinical trials and third party reimbursement. If we are not able to successfully scale up production of our products, then our sales and revenues will suffer. In order to commercialize our products, we need to be able to produce them in a cost effective way on a large scale to meet commercial demand, while maintaining extremely high standards for quality and reliability. The extent to which we fail to successfully commercialize our products will limit our ability to be profitable. We expect to rely on a limited number of independent manufacturers to produce our products. Our manufacturers systems and procedures may not be adequate to support our operations and may not be able to achieve the rapid execution necessary to exploit the market for our products. Our manufacturers could experience manufacturing and control problems as they begin to scale up our future manufacturing operations, if any, and we may not be able to scale up manufacturing in a timely manner or at a commercially reasonable cost to enable production in sufficient quantities. If we experience any of these problems with respect to our manufacturers initial or future scale ups of manufacturing operations, then we may not be able to have our products manufactured and delivered in a timely manner. Our products are new and evolving, and our manufacturers may encounter unforeseen difficulties in manufacturing them in commercial quantities or at all. 16 If we cannot develop adequate distribution, customer service and technical support ne2rks, then we may not be able to market and distribute our products effectively and or customers may decide not to order our products. In either case, our sales and revenues will suffer. Our strategy requires us to distribute our products and provide a significant amount of customer service and maintenance and other technical service. To provide these services, we have begun, and will need to continue, to develop a ne2rk of distribution and a staff of employees and independent contractors in each of the areas in which we intend to operate. We cannot assure that we will be able to organize and manage this ne2rk on a cost effective basis. If we cannot effectively organize and manage this ne2rk, then it may be difficult for us to distribute our products and to provide competitive service and support to our customers, in which case customers may be unable, or decide not, to order our products and our sales and revenues will suffer. We have limited experience selling our products to healthcare facilities, and we might be unsuccessful in increasing our sales. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to sell our products to hospitals and other healthcare facilities that include dialysis clinics. We have limited experience with respect to sales and marketing. If we are unsuccessful at manufacturing, marketing and selling our products, our operations and potential revenues will be materially adversely affected. We cannot sell our products, including certain modifications thereto, until we obtain the requisite regulatory approvals and clearances in the countries in which we intend to sell our products. If we fail to receive, or experience a significant delay in receiving, such approvals and clearances, then we may not be able to get our products to market and enhance our revenues. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to get our products into the market as quickly as possible. We have obtained a Conformit Europ ene ( CE ) mark, which demonstrates compliance with the relevant European Union requirements and is a regulatory prerequisite for selling our products in the European Union and certain other countries that recognize CE marking (collectively, European Community ), for our OLp r mid dilution hemodiafilter series product and our Dual Stage Ultrafilter ( DSU ). We have not yet obtained the CE mark for any of our other products. On April 30, 2012, we announced that we received clearance from the FDA to market our OLp r MD220 Hemodiafilter and OLp r H2H Module for use with a hemodialysis machine that provides ultrapure dialysate in accordance with current ANSI AAMI ISO standards, for the treatment of chronic renal failure patients. We have not begun to broadly market these products and are actively seeking a commercialization partner in the United States. There is no assurance that any existing products that have not yet been approved, or any new products developed by us in the future, will be approved for marketing. The clearance and or approval processes can be lengthy and uncertain and each requires substantial commitments of our financial resources and our management time and effort. We may not be able to obtain further CE marking or regulatory approval for any of our existing or new products in a timely manner or at all. Even if we do obtain regulatory approval, approval may be only for limited uses with specific classes of patients, processes or other devices. Our failure to obtain, or delays in obtaining, the necessary regulatory clearance and or approvals would prevent us from selling our affected products in the applicable regions. If we cannot sell some of our products in such regions, or if we are delayed in selling while waiting for the necessary clearance and or approvals, our ability to generate revenues from these products will be limited. We intend to market our products globally. Requirements pertaining to the sale of our products vary widely from country to country. It may be very expensive and difficult for us to meet the requirements for the sale of our products in many countries. As a result, we may not be able to obtain the required approvals in a timely manner, if at all. If we cannot sell our products in a particular region, then the size of our potential market could be reduced, which would limit our potential sales and revenues. Clinical studies that may be required for our products are costly and time consuming, and their outcome is uncertain. Before obtaining regulatory approvals for the commercial sale of any of our products, other than those for which we have already received marketing approval in the United States and elsewhere, we must demonstrate through clinical studies that our products are safe and effective. For products other than those for which we have already received marketing approval, if we do not prove in clinical trials that our products are safe and effective, we will not obtain marketing approvals from the applicable regulatory authorities. In particular, 1 or more of our products may not exhibit the expected medical benefits, may cause harmful side effects, may not be effective in treating dialysis patients or may have other unexpected characteristics that preclude regulatory approval for any or all indications of use or limit commercial use if approved. The length of time necessary to complete clinical trials varies significantly and is difficult to predict. Factors that can cause delay or termination of our clinical trials include slower than expected patient enrollment due to the nature of the protocol, the proximity of subjects to clinical sites, the eligibility criteria for the study, competition with clinical trials for similar devices or other factors; lower than expected retention rates of subjects in a clinical trial; inadequately trained or insufficient personnel at the study site to assist in overseeing and monitoring clinical trials; delays in approvals from a study site review board, or other required approvals; longer treatment time required to demonstrate effectiveness; lack of sufficient supplies of the product; adverse medical events or side effects in treated subjects; and lack of effectiveness of the product being tested. 17 Even if we obtain positive results from clinical studies for our products, we may not achieve the same success in future studies of such products. Data obtained from clinical studies are susceptible to varying interpretations that could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval. In addition, we may encounter delays or rejections based upon changes in regulatory policy for device approval during the period of product development and regulatory review of each submitted new device application. Moreover, regulatory approval may entail limitations on the indicated uses of the device. Failure to obtain requisite governmental approvals or failure to obtain approvals of the scope requested will delay or preclude our licensees or marketing partners from marketing our products or limit the commercial use of such products and will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, some or all of the clinical trials we undertake may not demonstrate sufficient safety and efficacy to obtain the requisite regulatory approvals, which could prevent or delay the creation of marketable products. Our product development costs will increase if we have delays in testing or approvals, if we need to perform more, larger or different clinical trials than planned or if our trials are not successful. Delays in our clinical trials may harm our financial results and the commercial prospects for our products. Additionally, we may be unable to complete our clinical trials if we are unable to obtain additional capital. We may be required to design and conduct additional clinical trials. We may be required to design and conduct additional clinical trials to further demonstrate the safety and efficacy of our products, which may result in significant expense and delay. Regulatory agencies may require new or additional clinical trials because of inconclusive results from current or earlier clinical trials, a possible failure to conduct clinical trials in complete adherence to certain regulatory standards, the identification of new clinical trial endpoints, or the need for additional data regarding the safety or efficacy of our products. It is possible that regulatory authorities may not ultimately approve our products for commercial sale in any jurisdiction, even if we believe future clinical results are positive. Significant additional governmental regulation could subject us to unanticipated delays which would adversely affect our sales and revenues. Our business strategy depends in part on our ability to get our products into the market as quickly as possible. Additional laws and regulations, or changes to existing laws and regulations that are applicable to our business may be enacted or promulgated, and the interpretation, application or enforcement of the existing laws and regulations may change. We cannot predict the nature of any future laws, regulations, interpretations, applications or enforcements or the specific effects any of these might have on our business. Any future laws, regulations, interpretations, applications or enforcements could delay or prevent regulatory approval or clearance of our products and our ability to market our products. Moreover, changes that result in our failure to comply with the requirements of applicable laws and regulations could result in the types of enforcement actions by the FDA and or other agencies as described above, all of which could impair our ability to have manufactured and to sell the affected products. Protecting our intellectual property in our technology through patents may be costly and ineffective. If we are not able to adequately secure or enforce protection of our intellectual property, then we may not be able to compete effectively and we may not be profitable. Our future success depends in part on our ability to protect the intellectual property for our technology through patents. We will only be able to protect our products and methods from unauthorized use by third parties to the extent that our products and methods are covered by valid and enforceable patents or are effectively maintained as trade secrets. Our 18 granted U.S. patents will expire at various times from 2018 to 2027, assuming they are properly maintained. The protection provided by our patents, and patent applications if issued, may not be broad enough to prevent competitors from introducing similar products into the market. Our patents, if challenged or if we attempt to enforce them, may not necessarily be upheld by the courts of any jurisdiction. Numerous publications may have been disclosed by, and numerous patents may have been issued to, our competitors and others relating to methods and devices for dialysis of which we are not aware and additional patents relating to methods and devices for dialysis may be issued to our competitors and others in the future. If any of those publications or patents conflict with our patent rights, or cover our products, then any or all of our patent applications could be rejected and any or all of our granted patents could be invalidated, either of which could materially adversely affect our competitive position. Litigation and other proceedings relating to patent matters, whether initiated by us or a third party, can be expensive and time consuming, regardless of whether the outcome is favorable to us, and may require the diversion of substantial financial, managerial and other resources. An adverse outcome could subject us to significant liabilities to third parties or require us to cease any related development, product sales or commercialization activities. In addition, if patents that contain dominating or conflicting claims have been or are subsequently issued to others and the claims of these patents are ultimately determined to be valid, then we may be required to obtain licenses under patents of others in order to develop, manufacture, use, import and or sell our products. We may not be able to obtain licenses under any of these patents on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we do not obtain these licenses, we could encounter delays in, or be prevented entirely from using, importing, developing, manufacturing, offering or selling any products or practicing any methods, or delivering any services requiring such licenses. 18 If we file patent applications or obtain patents in foreign countries, we will be subject to laws and procedures that differ from those in the United States. Such differences could create additional uncertainty about the level and extent of our patent protection. Moreover, patent protection in foreign countries may be different from patent protection under U.S. laws and may not be as favorable to us. Many non U.S. jurisdictions, for example, prohibit patent claims covering methods of medical treatment of humans, although this prohibition may not include devices used for such treatment. If we are not able to secure and enforce protection of our trade secrets through enforcement of our confidentiality and non competition agreements, then our competitors may gain access to our trade secrets, we may not be able to compete effectively and we may not be profitable. Such protection may be costly and ineffective. We attempt to protect our trade secrets, including the processes, concepts, ideas and documentation associated with our technologies, through the use of confidentiality agreements and non competition agreements with our current employees and with other parties to whom we have divulged such trade secrets. If these employees or other parties breach our confidentiality agreements and non competition agreements, or if these agreements are not sufficient to protect our technology or are found to be unenforceable, then our competitors could acquire and use information that we consider to be our trade secrets and we may not be able to compete effectively. Policing unauthorized use of our trade secrets is difficult and expensive, particularly because of the global nature of our operations. The laws of other countries may not adequately protect our trade secrets. If we are not able to maintain sufficient quality controls, then the approval or clearance of our products by the European Union, the FDA or other relevant authorities could be withdrawn, delayed or denied and our sales and revenues will suffer. Approval or clearance of our products could be withdrawn, delayed or denied by the European Union, the FDA and the relevant authorities of other countries if our manufacturing facilities do not comply with their respective manufacturing requirements. The European Union imposes requirements on quality control systems of manufacturers, which are inspected and certified on a periodic basis and may be subject to additional unannounced inspections. Failure by our manufacturers to comply with these requirements could prevent us from marketing our products in the European Community. The FDA also imposes requirements through quality system requirements regulations, which include requirements for good manufacturing practices. Failure by our manufacturers to comply with these requirements could prevent us from obtaining FDA approval of our products and from marketing such products in the United States. Although the manufacturing facilities and processes that we use to manufacture our OLpur MD HDF filter series have been inspected and certified by a worldwide testing and certification agency (also referred to as a notified body) that performs conformity assessments to European Union requirements for medical devices, they have not been inspected by the FDA. A notified body is a group accredited and monitored by governmental agencies that inspects manufacturing facilities and quality control systems at regular intervals and is authorized to carry out unannounced inspections. We cannot be sure that any of the facilities or processes we use will comply or continue to comply with their respective requirements on a timely basis or at all, which could delay or prevent our obtaining the approvals we need to market our products in the European Community and the United States. To market our products in the European Community, the United States and other countries, where approved, manufacturers of such products must continue to comply or ensure compliance with the relevant manufacturing requirements. Although we cannot control the manufacturers of our products, we may need to expend time, resources and effort in product manufacturing and quality control to assist with their continued compliance with these requirements. If violations of applicable requirements are noted during periodic inspections of the manufacturing facilities of our manufacturers, then we may not be able to continue to market the products manufactured in such facilities and our revenues may be materially adversely affected. We may face significant risks associated with international operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. We expect to manufacture and to market our products globally. Our international operations are subject to a number of risks, including the following fluctuations in exchange rates of the United States dollar could adversely affect our results of operations; we may face difficulties in enforcing and collecting accounts receivable under some countries legal systems; local regulations may restrict our ability to sell our products, have our products manufactured or conduct other operations; political instability could disrupt our operations; some governments and customers may have longer payment cycles, with resulting adverse effects on our cash flow; and some countries could impose additional taxes or restrict the import of our products. 19 Any 1 or more of these factors could increase our costs, reduce our revenues, or disrupt our operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. If we are unable to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting, our ability to produce accurate financial statements on a timely basis could be impaired and the market price of our securities may be negatively affected. Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 requires us to maintain internal control over financial reporting and to report any material weaknesses in such internal control. A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected and corrected on a timely basis. We also are required to furnish a report by management on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. We perform system and process evaluation and testing of our internal controls over financial reporting to allow management to prepare and furnish such a report. In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2014, we discovered that we had improperly accounted for our warrants as comp1nts of equity instead of as derivative liabilities, and our management and auditors determined that this resulted from a material weakness in internal control over financial reporting. This material weakness led to the need for the restatement of (i) our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010 and 2009, including the cumulative effect as of January 1, 2009, and (ii) our unaudited condensed consolidated interim financial statements as of, and for each of the quarterly periods ended, March 31, June 30, and September 30, in the years 2014 and 2013 While the above material weakness has been remediated, if we are unable to maintain proper and effective internal control over financial reporting in the future, we may not be able to produce timely and accurate financial statements. If that were to happen, investors may lose confidence in the accuracy and completeness of our financial reports, the market price of our securities could decline and we could be subject to sanctions or investigations by the SEC or other regulatory authorities. Risks Related to Owning Our Common Stock There currently is a limited trading market for our Common Stock. We do not currently meet all of the requirements for initial listing of our Common Stock on a registered stock exchange. Our Common Stock is quoted on the OTCQB. Trading in our Common Stock on the OTCQB has been very limited. As a result, an investor may find it difficult to dispose of or to obtain accurate quotations as to the market value of our Common Stock, and our Common Stock may be less attractive for margin loans, for investment by financial institutions, as consideration in future capital raising transactions or other purposes. There is no guarantee that we will ever become listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market, or any other exchange, or that a liquid trading market for our Common Stock will develop. Our Common Stock could be further diluted as a result of the issuance of additional shares of Common Stock, warrants or options. In the past we have issued Common Stock and warrants in order to raise m1y. We have also issued stock options and restricted stock as compensation for services and incentive compensation for our employees, directors and consultants. We have shares of Common Stock reserved for issuance upon the exercise of certain of these securities and may increase the shares reserved for these purposes in the future. Our issuance of additional Common Stock, convertible securities, options and warrants could affect the rights of our stockholders, could reduce the market price of our Common Stock, or could obligate us to issue additional shares of Common Stock. Market sales of large amounts of our Common Stock, or the potential for those sales even if they do not actually occur, may have the effect of depressing the market price of our Common Stock, the supply of Common Stock available for resale could be increased which could stimulate trading activity and cause the market price of our Common Stock to drop, even if our business is doing well. Furthermore, the issuance of any additional shares of our Common Stock or securities convertible into our Common Stock could be substantially dilutive to holders of our Common Stock if they do not invest in future offerings. 20 The prices at which shares of the Common Stock trade have been and will likely continue to be volatile. During the 2 years ended December 31, 2016, our Common Stock has traded at prices ranging from a high of $0.96 to a low of $0.20 per share. Due to the lack of an active trading market for our Common Stock, you should expect the prices at which our Common Stock might trade to continue to be highly volatile. The expected volatile price of our stock will make it difficult to predict the value of your investment, to sell your shares at a profit at any given time, or to plan purchases and sales in advance. A variety of other factors might also affect the market price of our Common Stock. These include, but are not limited to achievement or rejection of regulatory approvals by our competitors or us; publicity regarding actual or potential clinical or regulatory results relating to products under development by our competitors or us; delays or failures in initiating, completing or analyzing clinical trials or the unsatisfactory design or results of these trials; announcements of technological innovations or new commercial products by our competitors or us; developments concerning proprietary rights, including patents; regulatory developments in the United States and foreign countries; economic or other crises and other external factors; period to period fluctuations in our results of operations; threatened or actual litigation; changes in financial estimates by securities analysts; and sales of our Common Stock. We are not able to control many of these factors, and we believe that period to period comparisons of our financial results will not necessarily be indicative of our future performance. In addition, the stock market in general, and the market for medical technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations in recent years that might have been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of individual companies. These broad market and industry factors might seriously harm the market price of our Common Stock, regardless of our operating performance. Securities class action litigation has often been instituted against companies following periods of volatility in the overall market and in the market price of a company securities. This litigation, if instituted against us, could result in very substantial costs, divert our management attention and resources and harm our business, operating results and financial condition. We have never paid dividends and do not intend to pay cash dividends. We have never paid dividends on our Common Stock and currently do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our Common Stock for the foreseeable future. Consequently, any returns on an investment in our Common Stock in the foreseeable future will have to come from an increase in the value of the stock itself. As noted above, the lack of an active trading market for our Common Stock will make it difficult to value and sell our Common Stock. While our dividend policy will be based on the operating results and capital needs of our business, it is anticipated that all earnings, if any, will be retained to finance our future operations. Because we are subject to the penny stock rules, you may have difficulty in selling our Common Stock. Our Common Stock is subject to regulations of the SEC relating to the market for penny stocks. Penny stock, as defined by the Penny Stock Reform Act, is any equity security not traded on a national securities exchange that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share. The penny stock regulations generally require that a disclosure schedule explaining the penny stock market and the risks associated therewith be delivered to purchasers of penny stocks and impose various sales practice requirements on broker dealers who sell penny stocks to persons other than established customers and accredited investors. The broker dealer must make a suitability determination for each purchaser and receive the purchaser written agreement prior to the sale. In addition, the broker dealer must make certain mandated disclosures, including the actual sale or purchase price and actual bid offer quotations, as well as the compensation to be received by the broker dealer and certain associated persons. The regulations applicable to penny stocks may severely affect the market liquidity for your Common Stock and could limit your ability to sell your securities in the secondary market. 21 Several provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law, our fourth amended and restated certificate of incorporation, as amended, and our second amended and restated bylaws could discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition, which could adversely affect the market price of our Common Stock. Several provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law, our fourth amended and restated certificate of incorporation, as amended, and our second amended and restated bylaws could discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition that stockholders may consider favorable, and the market price of our Common Stock could be reduced as a result. These provisions include authorizing our board of directors to issue blank check preferred stock without stockholder approval; providing for a classified board of directors with staggered, 3 year terms; prohibiting us from engaging in a business combination with an interested stockholder for a period of 3 years after the date of the transaction in which the person became an interested stockholder unless certain provisions are met; prohibiting cumulative voting in the election of directors; limiting the persons who may call special meetings of stockholders; and establishing advance notice requirements for nominations for election to our board of directors or for proposing matters that can be acted on by stockholders at stockholder meetings. As a smaller reporting company with little or no name recognition and with several risks and uncertainties that could impair our business operations, we are not likely to generate widespread interest in our Common Stock. Without widespread interest in our Common Stock, our Common Stock price may be highly volatile and an investment in our Common Stock could decline in value. Unlike many companies with publicly traded securities, we have little or no name recognition in the investment community. We are a relatively new company and very few investors are familiar with either our company or our products. We do not have an active trading market in our Common Stock, and 1 might never develop, or if it does develop, might not continue. Additionally, the market price of our Common Stock may fluctuate significantly in response to many factors, many of which are beyond our control. Risks and uncertainties, including those described elsewhere in this Risk Factors section could impair our business operations or otherwise cause our operating results or prospects to be below expectations of investors and market analysts, which could adversely affect the market price of our Common Stock. As a result, investors in our Common Stock may not be able to resell their shares at or above their purchase price and could lose all of their investment. Securities class action litigation is often brought against public companies following periods of volatility in the market price of such company securities. We may become subject to this type of litigation in the future. Litigation of this type could be extremely expensive and divert management attention and resources from running our company. Our directors, executive officers and Lambda Investors LLC ( Lambda ) control a significant portion of our stock and, if they choose to vote together, could have sufficient voting power to control the vote on substantially all corporate matters. As of March 17, 2017, Lambda, our largest stockholder, beneficially owned approximately 61% of our outstanding Common Stock. As a result of this ownership, Lambda has the ability to exert significant influence over our policies and affairs, including the election of directors. Lambda, whether acting al1 or acting with other stockholders, could have the power to elect all of our directors and to control the vote on substantially all other corporate matters without the approval of other stockholders. Furthermore, such concentration of voting power could enable Lambda, whether acting al1 or acting with other stockholders, to delay or prevent another party from taking control of our company even where such change of control transaction might be desirable to other stockholders. The interests of Lambda in any matter put before the stockholders may differ from those of any other stockholder. Future sales of our Common Stock could cause the market price of our Common Stock to decline. The market price of our Common Stock could decline due to sales of a large number of shares in the market, including sales of shares by Lambda or any other large stockholder, or the perception that such sales could occur. These sales could also make it more difficult or impossible for us to sell equity securities in the future at a time and price that we deem appropriate to raise funds through future offerings of Common Stock. Future sales of our Common Stock by stockholders could depress the market price of our Common Stock. 22 Shares eligible for future sale may adversely affect the market. From time to time, certain of our stockholders may be eligible to sell all or some of their shares of Common Stock by means of ordinary brokerage transactions in the open market pursuant to Rule 144 promulgated under the Securities Act, subject to certain limitations. In general, pursuant to Rule 144, non affiliate stockholders may sell freely after holding their shares for six months and affiliates may sell freely after holding their shares for 1 year, in each case, subject to current public information, notice and other requirements. Any substantial sales of our Common Stock pursuant to Rule 144 may have a material adverse effect on the market price of our Common Stock. Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments Not required.
