CIK: 12208
Company Name: BIO RAD LABORATORIES INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2015-03-02
Accession Number: 0000012208-15-000012


ITEM 1 BUSINESS General Founded in 1952 and incorporated in 1957, Bio Rad Laboratories, Inc. (referred to in this report as Bio Rad, we, us, and our ) was initially engaged in the development and production of specialty chemicals used in biochemical, pharmaceutical and other life science research applications. We entered the field of clinical diagnostics with the development of our first test kit based on separation techniques and materials developed for life science research. Through internal research and development efforts and acquisitions we have expanded into various markets. Today, Bio Rad manufactures and supplies the life science research, healthcare, analytical chemistry and other markets with a broad range of products and systems used to separate complex chemical and biological materials and to identify, analyze and purify their comp1nts. As we broadened our product lines, we also expanded our geographical market. We have direct distribution channels in over 35 countries outside the United States through subsidiaries whose focus is sales, customer service and product distribution. In some regions, sales efforts are supplemented by distributors and agents. Description of Business Business Segments Today, Bio Rad operates in 2 industry segments designated as Life Science and Clinical Diagnostics. Both segments operate worldwide. Our Life Science segment and our Clinical Diagnostics segment generated 33% and 66% , respectively, of our net sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 . We generated approximately 32% of our consolidated net sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 from U.S. sales and approximately 68% from sales in our remaining worldwide markets. For a description of business and financial information on industry and geographic segments, see Note 14 of Item 8 of I of this report. Life Science Segment Our Life Science segment is at the forefront of discovery, creating advanced tools to answer complex biological questions. We are a leader in the life sciences market and develop, manufacture and market a range of more than 5,000 reagents, apparatus and laboratory instruments that serve a global customer base. Many of our products are used in established research techniques, biopharmaceutical production processes and food testing regimes. These 3 techniques are typically used to separate, purify and identify biological materials such as proteins, nucleic acids and bacteria within a laboratory or production setting. We focus on selected segments of the life sciences market in proteomics (the study of proteins), genomics (the study of genes), biopharmaceutical production, cell biology and food safety. We estimate that the worldwide market for products in these selected segments was approximately $8 billion. Our principal life science customers include universities and medical schools, industrial research organizations, government agencies, pharmaceutical manufacturers, biotechnology researchers, food producers and food testing laboratories. Clinical Diagnostics Segment Our Clinical Diagnostics segment designs, manufactures, sells and supports test systems, informatics systems, test kits and specialized quality controls that serve clinical laboratories in the global diagnostics market. Our products currently address specific niches within the in vitro diagnostics (IVD) test market, and we seek to focus on the higher margin, higher growth segments of this market. We supply more than 3,000 different products that cover more than 300 clinical diagnostic tests to the IVD test market. We estimate that the worldwide sales for products in the markets we serve were approximately $10 billion. IVD tests are conducted outside the human body and are used to identify and measure substances in a patient tissue, blood or urine. Our products consist of reagents, instruments and software, typically provided to our customers as an integrated package to allow them to generate reproducible test results. Revenue in this business is highly recurring, as laboratories typically standardize test methodologies, which are dependent on a particular supplier equipment, reagents and consumable products. An installed base of diagnostic test systems therefore typically creates an ongoing source of revenue through the sale of test kits for each sample analyzed on an installed system. Our principal clinical diagnostic customers include hospital laboratories, reference laboratories, transfusion laboratories and physician office laboratories. Raw Materials and Comp1nts We utilize a wide variety of chemicals, biological materials, electronic comp1nts, machined metal parts, optical parts, computing and peripheral devices. Most of these materials and comp1nts are available from numerous sources, and generally we have not experienced difficulty in securing adequate supplies. However, in certain instances we acquire comp1nts and materials from a sole supplier. Due to the regulatory environment in which we operate, we may be unable to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for some comp1nts or materials. Patents, Trademarks and Licenses We own numerous U.S. and international patents and trademarks. We also pay royalties on the sales of certain products under several patent license agreements. We view these patents, trademarks and license agreements as valuable assets; however, we believe that our ability to develop and manufacture our products depends primarily on our knowledge, technology and special skills rather than our patent, trademark and licensing positions. Seasonal Operations and Backlog Our business is not inherently seasonal. However, the European custom of concentrating vacation during the summer months usually tempers third quarter sales volume and operating income. For the most part, we operate in markets characterized by short lead times and the absence of significant backlogs. Management has concluded that backlog information is not material to our business as a whole. 4 Sales and Marketing We conduct our worldwide operations through an extensive direct sales force and service ne2rk, employing approximately 740 sales and service people around the world. Our sales force typically consists of experienced industry practiti1rs with scientific training, and we maintain a separate specialist sales force for each of our segments. We believe that this direct sales approach allows us to sell a broader range of our products and have more direct contact with our customers; however, we also use distributors and agents, particularly in many of our international markets. Our customer base is broad and diversified. Our worldwide customer base includes (1) prominent university and research institutions, providing us access to more than 150,000 scientists in the United States al1; (2) hospital, public health and commercial laboratories; (3) other leading diagnostic manufacturers; and (4) leading companies in the biotechnology, pharmaceutical, chemical and food industries. In 2014 , no single customer accounted for more than 3 percent of our total net sales. Our sales are affected by a number of external factors. For example, a number of our customers, particularly in the Life Science segment, are substantially dependent on government grants and research contracts for their funding. A significant reduction of government funding has in the past and could in the future have a detrimental effect on the results of this segment. Most of our international sales are generated by our wholly owned subsidiaries and their branch offices. Certain of these subsidiaries also have manufacturing facilities. Bio Rad international operations are subject to certain risks common to foreign operations in general, such as changes in governmental regulations, import restrictions and foreign exchange fluctuations. Competition The markets served by our product groups are highly competitive. Our competitors range in size from start ups to large multinational corporations with significant resources and reach. We seek to compete primarily in market segments where our products and technology offer customers specific advantages over the competition. Because of the breadth of its product lines, our Life Science segment does not face the same competitors for all of its products. Competitors in this market include GE Biosciences, Merck Millipore and Thermo Fisher Scientific. We compete primarily based on meeting performance specifications and offering complete solutions. Major competitors of our Clinical Diagnostics segment include Roche, Abbott Laboratories, Siemens, Danaher, Thermo Fisher, Becton Dickinson, bioM rieux, Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Tosoh, Immucor and DiaSorin. Research and Development We conduct extensive research and development activities in all areas of our business, employing approximately 735 people worldwide in these activities. Research and development has played a major role in Bio Rad growth and is expected to continue to do so in the future. Our research teams are continuously developing new products and new applications for existing products. In our development of new products and applications, we interact with scientific and medical professionals at universities, hospitals and medical schools, and within our industry. We spent approximately $220.3 million , $2110 million and $209.2 million on research and development activities in 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , respectively. Regulatory Matters The development, testing, manufacturing, marketing, post market surveillance, distribution, advertising and labeling of certain of our products (primarily diagnostic products) are subject to regulation in the United States by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and in other jurisdictions by state and foreign government authorities. FDA regulations require that some new products have pre marketing clearance or approval by the FDA and require certain products to be manufactured in accordance with FDA good manufacturing practice regulations, to be extensively tested and to be properly labeled to 5 disclose test results and performance claims and limitations. After a product that is subject to FDA regulation is placed on the market, numerous regulatory requirements apply, including, for example, the requirement that we comply with recordkeeping and reporting requirements, such as the FDA medical device reporting regulations and reporting of corrections and removals. The FDA enforces these requirements by inspection and market surveillance. The FDA has authority to take various administrative and legal actions against us for our, or our products , failure to comply with relevant legal or regulatory requirements, including issuing warning letters, initiating product seizures, requesting or requiring product recalls or withdrawals, and other civil or criminal sanctions, among other things. We are also subject to additional healthcare regulation and enforcement by the federal government and by authorities in the states and foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct our business. Such laws include, without limitation, state and federal anti kickback, fraud and abuse, false claims, privacy and security and physician sunshine laws and regulations. If our operations are found to be in violation of any of such laws or any other governmental regulations that apply to us, we may be subject to penalties, including, without limitation, civil and criminal penalties, damages, fines, the curtailment or restructuring of our operations, exclusion from participation in federal and state healthcare programs and imprisonment, any of which could adversely affect our ability to operate our business and our financial results. Sales of our products will depend, in part, on the extent to which our products or diagnostic tests using our products will be covered by third party payors, such as government health care programs, commercial insurance and managed healthcare organizations. These third party payors are increasingly reducing reimbursements for certain medical products and services. In addition, the U.S. government, state legislatures and foreign governments have continued implementing cost containment programs, including price controls and restrictions on reimbursement. Adoption of price controls and cost containment measures, and adoption of more restrictive policies in jurisdictions with existing controls and measures, could further limit our net revenue and results. Decreases in third party reimbursement for our products or diagnostic tests using our products, or a decision by a third party payor to not cover our products could reduce or eliminate utilization of our products and have a material adverse effect on our sales, results of operations and financial condition. In addition, healthcare reform measures have been and will be adopted in the future, any of which could limit the amounts that governments will pay for healthcare products and services, which could result in reduced demand for our products or additional pricing pressures. As a multinational manufacturer and distributor of sophisticated instrumentation, we must meet a wide array of electromagnetic compatibility and safety compliance requirements to satisfy regulations in the United States, the European Union and other jurisdictions. Our operations are subject to federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws and regulations that govern such activities as transportation of goods, emissions to air and discharges to water, as well as handling and disposal practices for solid, hazardous and medical wastes. In addition to environmental laws that regulate our operations, we are also subject to environmental laws and regulations that create liabilities and clean up responsibility for spills, disposals or other releases of hazardous substances into the environment as a result of our operations or otherwise impacting real property that we own or operate. The environmental laws and regulations could also subject us to claims by third parties for damages resulting from any spills, disposals or releases resulting from our operations or at any of our properties. These regulatory requirements vary widely among countries. Employees At December 31, 2014 , Bio Rad had approximately 7,600 employees. Approximately eight percent of our approximately 3,100 U.S. employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement, which will expire on November 8, 2016. Many of our non U.S. full time employees, especially in France, are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We consider our employee relations in general to be good. 6 Available Information Bio Rad files annual, quarterly, and current reports, proxy statements, and other documents with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The public may read and copy any materials that we file with the SEC at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. Also, the SEC maintains an Internet website that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers, including Bio Rad, that file electronically with the SEC. The public can obtain any documents that we file with the SEC at http www.sec.gov . Bio Rad website address is www.bio rad.com . We make available, free of charge through our website, our Form 10 Ks, 10 Qs and 8 Ks, and any amendments to these forms, as soon as reasonably practicable after filing with the SEC. The information on our website is not part of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In evaluating our business and whether to invest in any of our securities, you should carefully read the following risk factors in addition to the other information contained in this Annual Report. We believe that any of the following risks could have a material effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition, our industry or the trading price of our common stock. We operate in a continually changing business environment, and new risks and uncertainties emerge from time to time. We cannot predict these new risks and uncertainties, nor can we assess the extent to which any such new risks and uncertainties or the extent to which the risks and uncertainties set forth below may adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition, our industry or the trading price of our common stock. Our settlement with government agencies in connection with violations by us of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. As previously disclosed, we entered into a non prosecution agreement (NPA) with the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and consented to the entry of an Order by the SEC (SEC Order), effective November 3, 2014, which actions resolved both the DOJ and the SEC investigations into our violations of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). Under the terms of the NPA and the SEC Order, we agreed to pay a financial penalty and certain amounts in disgorgement and interest as well as to compliance, reporting and cooperation obligations to be performed for 2 years. For additional information regarding this settlement and related legal proceedings, see Item 3 of this Annual Report. We cannot be certain that our remediation efforts will be sufficient to comply with the terms of the NPA and the SEC Order. Our failure to comply with the NPA and the SEC Order could result in future actions against us by the DOJ and the SEC. In addition, whether by virtue of announcement of the NPA and the SEC Order or otherwise, we may be subject to investigations by foreign governments or further claims by third parties arising from conduct subject to the investigation or our other international operations. Many of our customers in our significant international operations are government agencies or state owned or state controlled universities, hospitals and laboratories. The announcement of the NPA and the SEC Order may harm our reputation with these customers, which could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. Our international operations expose us to additional costs and legal and regulatory risks, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We have significant international operations. We have direct distribution channels in over 35 countries outside the United States, and in 2014 our foreign subsidiaries generated 68% of our net sales. Compliance with complex foreign and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international operations increases our cost of doing business. These numerous and sometimes conflicting laws and regulations include, among others, data privacy requirements, labor relations laws, tax laws, anti competition regulations, import and trade restrictions, export requirements, U.S. 7 laws such as the FCPA and other U.S. federal laws and regulations established by the office of Foreign Asset Control, local laws such as the UK Bribery Act 2010 or other local laws which prohibit corrupt payments to governmental officials or certain payments or remunerations to customers. Given the high level of complexity of these laws, there is a risk that we may inadvertently breach some provisions, for example, through fraudulent or negligent behavior of individual employees, our failure to comply with certain formal documentation requirements, or otherwise. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate these risks and manage these challenges through policies, procedures and internal controls. However, we have a dispersed international sales organization, and we use distributors and agents in many of our international operations. This structure makes it more difficult for us to ensure that our international selling operations comply with our global policies and procedures. Violations of these laws and regulations could result in fines, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or our employees, requirements to obtain export licenses, cessation of business activities in sancti1d countries, implementation of compliance programs, and prohibitions on the conduct of our business. For example, and as previously reported, in 2014 our selling subsidiary in China was subject to an administrative penalty and disgorgement of profits of $0.3 million for providing free products pursuant to contractual obligations with customers during 2012 and 2013, which was deemed to be in violation of China Anti Unfair Competition Law. Violations of laws and regulations could result in prohibitions on our ability to offer our products in 1 or more countries and could materially damage our reputation, our brand, our international expansion efforts, our ability to attract and retain employees, or our business, results of operations and financial condition. See also our risk factor regarding government regulations below. The industries and market segments in which we operate are highly competitive, and we may not be able to compete effectively. The life science and clinical diagnostics markets are each highly competitive. Some of our competitors have merged, and some of our competitors have greater financial resources than we do and are less leveraged than we are, making them better equipped to license technologies and intellectual property from third parties or to fund research and development, manufacturing and marketing efforts. For more information on our competitors, see Competition in Item 1 of this Annual Report. Moreover, competitive and regulatory conditions in many markets in which we operate restrict our ability to fully recover, through price increases, higher costs of acquired goods and services resulting from inflation and other drivers of cost increases. Many public tenders have become more competitive due to governments lengthening the commitments of their public tenders to multiple years, which reduces the number of tenders in which we can participate annually. Because the value of these multiple year tenders is so high, our competitors have been more aggressive with their pricing. Our failure to compete effectively and or pricing pressures resulting from competition could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. We may not be able to grow our business because of our failure to develop new or improved products. Our future growth depends in part on our ability to continue to improve our product offerings and develop and introduce new product lines and extensions that integrate technological advances. In particular, we may not be able to keep up with changes in the clinical diagnostics industry, such as the trend toward molecular diagnostics or point of care tests. If we are unable to integrate technological advances into our product offerings or to design, develop, manufacture and market new product lines and extensions successfully and in a timely manner, our business, results of operations and financial condition will be adversely affected. We have experienced product launch delays in the past, and may do so in the future. We cannot assure you that our product and process development efforts will be successful or that new products we introduce will achieve market acceptance. Failure to launch successful new products or improvements to existing products may cause our products to become obsolete, which could harm our business, results of operations and financial condition. 8 Our failure to establish and maintain effective internal control over financial reporting could result in material misstatements in our financial statements, our failure to meet our reporting obligations and cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information, which in turn could cause the trading price of our common stock to decline. Maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting is necessary for us to produce reliable financial statements. In connection with our assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and the preparation of our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013, we identified a material weakness in the design of monitoring controls over operations at certain of our locations both within the United States and overseas, as well as a lack of documentation required to operate these controls appropriately. Although we have remediated this material weakness as of December 31, 2014, we cannot assure you that additional material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting will not be identified in the future. For example, we previously identified different material weaknesses in internal controls at December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2010, both of which have been remediated. Such material weaknesses have adversely affected us in the past and could affect us in the future, and the results of our periodic management evaluations and annual auditor attestation reports regarding the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 Any failure to maintain new and more precise monitoring controls and improved detection and communication of financial misstatements across all levels of the organization could result in additional material weaknesses, result in material misstatements in our financial statements and cause us to fail to meet our reporting obligations. This could cause us to lose public confidence, and could cause the trading price of our common stock to decline. For further information regarding our controls and procedures, see Item 9A of this Annual Report. We are subject to foreign currency exchange fluctuations, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. As stated above, a significant portion of our operations and sales are outside of the United States. When we make purchases and sales in currencies other than the U.S. dollars, we are exposed to fluctuations in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar that may adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Our international sales are largely denominated in local currencies. As a result, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar negatively impacts our consolidated net sales expressed in U.S. dollars. In 2014 our consolidated net sales grew by 33% compared to 2013 on a currency neutral basis; however, due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies in which we sell products our consolidated net sales only grew by 20% as reported in U.S. dollars. Conversely, when the U.S. dollar weakens, our expenses at our international sites increase. In addition, the volatility of other currencies, such as the Swiss Franc and Russian Ruble, may negatively impact our operations outside of the United States and increase our costs to hedge against currency fluctuations. We cannot assure you that future shifts in currency exchange rates will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. For further information regarding our foreign exchange risk, see Foreign currency exchange gains and losses in Item 7 and Foreign Exchange Risk in Item 7A of this Annual Report. Recent changes to our organizational structure and executive management team could negatively impact our business. We recently made significant changes to our organizational structure. We functionalized our manufacturing and selling organizations globally and separated them from our marketing and research and development organizations. Specifically, we combined our international selling organization with our North American selling divisions into 1 global selling group and consolidated our manufacturing divisions into 1 global manufacturing group. We also created new management positions to head each of these groups. In addition, we recently appointed new executives to head each of our Life Science and Clinical Diagnostics segments, and we appointed a Chief Operating Officer. We also recently restructured our Life Science segment based on functional groups rather than product line divisions. These changes may have unintended consequences, such as distraction of our management and 9 employees, business disruption, attrition of our workforce, inability to attract or retain key employees, and reduced employee morale or productivity. We may experience difficulties implementing our new global enterprise resource planning system. We are engaged in a multi year implementation of a new global enterprise resource planning system (ERP). The ERP is designed to efficiently maintain our books and records and provide information important to the operation of our business to our management team. The ERP will continue to require significant investment of human and financial resources. In implementing the ERP, we may experience significant delays, increased costs and other difficulties. Any significant disruption or deficiency in the design and implementation of the ERP could adversely affect our ability to process orders, ship product, send invoices and track payments, fulfill contractual obligations or otherwise operate our business. For example, we experienced system implementation issues in our Clinical Diagnostics segment during our first deployment that impacted invoicing and caused an increase in accounts receivable. While we have invested significant resources in planning, project management and training, additional and significant implementation issues may arise. In addition, our efforts to centralize various business processes and functions within our organization in connection with our ERP implementation may disrupt our operations and negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. Breaches of our information systems could have material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. Through our sales and eCommerce channels, we collect and store confidential information that customers provide to, among other things, purchase products or services, enroll in promotional programs and register on our Web site. We also acquire and retain information about suppliers and employees in the normal course of business. We also create and maintain proprietary information that is critical to our business, such as our product designs and manufacturing processes. Despite recent initiatives to improve our technology systems, such as our enterprise resource planning implementation and the centralization of our global information technology organization, we could experience a significant data security breach. Computer hackers may attempt to penetrate our or our vendors information systems and, if successful, misappropriate confidential customer, supplier, employee or other business information, such as our intellectual property. Third parties could also gain control of our systems and use them for criminal purposes while appearing to be us. As a result, we could lose existing customers, have difficulty attracting new customers, be exposed to claims from customers, financial institutions, payment card associations, employees and other persons, have regulatory sanctions or penalties imposed, incur additional expenses or lose revenues as a result of a data privacy breach, or suffer other adverse consequences. Our operations and ability to process sales orders, particularly through our eCommerce channels, could also be disrupted. Any significant breakdown, intrusion, interruption, corruption, or destruction of our systems, as well as any data breaches, could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. See also our risk factors regarding our ERP implementation above and our information technology systems below. Risks relating to intellectual property rights may negatively impact our business. We rely on a combination of copyright, trade secret, patent and trademark laws and third party nondisclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property rights and products. However, we cannot assure you that our intellectual property rights will not be challenged, invalidated, circumvented or rendered unenforceable, or that meaningful protection or adequate remedies will be available to us. For instance, unauthorized third parties have attempted to copy our intellectual property, reverse engineer or obtain and use information that we regard as proprietary, or have developed equivalent technologies independently, and may do so in the future. Additionally, third parties have asserted patent, copyright and other intellectual property rights to technologies that are important to us, and may do so in the future. If we are unable to license or otherwise access protected technology used in our products, or if we lose our rights under any existing licenses, we could be prohibited from manufacturing and marketing such products. From time to time, we also must enforce our patents or other intellectual property rights or defend ourselves against claimed infringement of the rights of others through litigation. As a result, we could incur substantial costs, be forced to redesign our products, or be required to pay damages to an infringed party. Any of the foregoing matters could adversely impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. 10 Global economic conditions could continue to adversely affect our operations. In recent years, we have been faced with very challenging global economic conditions. Further deterioration in the global economic environment may result in decreased demand for our products, increased competition, downward pressure on the prices for our products and longer sales cycles. A weakening of macroeconomic conditions may also adversely affect our suppliers, which could result in interruptions in supply in the future. We have also experienced delays in collecting receivables in certain countries in Western Europe, and we may experience similar delays in these and other countries or regions experiencing liquidity problems. As of December 31, 2014, we had accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, in Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal of $45.4 million . In addition, a slowing of growth in the Chinese economy and in emerging markets, especially those oil producing countries that have been affected by the recent decline in oil prices, could adversely affect our business, results of operations or financial condition. Reductions in government funding and the capital spending programs of our customers could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. Our customers include universities, clinical diagnostics laboratories, government agencies, hospitals and pharmaceutical, biotechnology and chemical companies. The capital spending programs of these institutions and companies have a significant effect on the demand for our products. Such programs are based on a wide variety of factors, including the resources available to make such purchases, the availability of funding from grants by governments or government agencies, the spending priorities for various types of equipment and the policies regarding capital expenditures during industry downturns or recessionary periods. If government funding to our customers were to decrease, or if our customers were to decrease or reallocate their budgets in a manner adverse to us, our business, results of operations or financial condition could be materially and adversely effected. For more information on our customers, see Sales and Marketing in Item 1 of this Annual Report. Changes in the healthcare industry could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. There have been, and will continue to be, significant changes in the healthcare industry in an effort to reduce costs. These changes include The trend towards managed care, together with healthcare reform of the delivery system in the United States and efforts to reform in Europe, has resulted in increased pressure on healthcare providers and other participants in the healthcare industry to reduce selling prices. Consolidation among healthcare providers has resulted in fewer, more powerful groups, whose purchasing power gives them cost containment leverage. In particular, there has been a consolidation of blood transfusion centers, as well as an industry decline in the number of blood transfusions. These industry trends and competitive forces place constraints on the levels of overall pricing, and thus could have a material adverse effect on our gross margins for products we sell in clinical diagnostic markets. Third party payors, such as Medicare and Medicaid in the United States, have reduced their reimbursements for certain medical products and services. Our Clinical Diagnostics business is impacted by the level of reimbursement available for clinical tests from third party payors. In the United States payment for many diagnostic tests furnished to Medicare fee for service beneficiaries is made based on the Medicare Clinical Laboratory Fee Schedule (CLFS), a fee schedule established and adjusted from time to time by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Some commercial payors are guided by the CLFS in establishing their reimbursement rates. Clinicians may decide not to order clinical diagnostic tests if third party payments are inadequate, and we cannot predict whether third party payors will offer adequate reimbursement for tests utilizing our products to make them commercially attractive. Recent legislation, such as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (PPACA) and the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, have reduced 11 the payments for clinical laboratory services paid under the CLFS. In addition, the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 will make significant changes to the way Medicare will pay for clinical laboratory services, which will further reduce reimbursement rates. The PPACA has also imposed a 23% excise tax on the sales of certain medical devices in the U.S., which we are required to pay on most of our United States Clinical Diagnostic sales. To the extent that the healthcare industry seeks to address the need to contain costs stemming from reform measures such as those contained in the PPACA and the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014, or in future legislation, by limiting the number of clinical tests being performed or the amount of reimbursement available for such tests, our business, results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. If these changes in the healthcare markets in the United States and Europe continue, we could be forced to alter our approach in selling, marketing, distributing and servicing our products. We are subject to substantial government regulation, and any changes in regulation or violations of regulations by us could adversely affect our business, prospects, results of operations or financial condition. Some of our products (primarily our Clinical Diagnostic products), production processes and marketing are subject to U.S. federal, state and local, and foreign regulation, including by the FDA in the United States and its foreign counterparts. The FDA regulates our Clinical Diagnostic products as medical devices, and we are subject to significant regulatory clearances or approvals to market our Clinical Diagnostic products and other requirements including, for example, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, such as the FDA medical device reporting regulations and reporting of corrections and removals. The FDA has broad regulatory and enforcement powers. If the FDA determines that we have failed to comply with applicable regulatory requirements, it can impose a variety of enforcement actions ranging from public warning letters, fines, injunctions, consent decrees and civil penalties to suspension or delayed issuance of approvals, seizure or recall of our products, total or partial shutdown of production, withdrawal of approvals or clearances already granted, and criminal prosecution. The FDA can also require us to repair, replace or refund the cost of devices that we manufactured or distributed. In addition, the FDA may change its clearance and approval policies, adopt additional regulations or revise existing regulations, or take other actions, which may prevent or delay approval or clearance of our products or impact our ability to modify our currently approved or cleared products on a timely basis. Changes in the FDA review of certain clinical diagnostic products referred to as laboratory developed tests, which are tests developed by a single laboratory for use only in that laboratory, could affect some of our customers who use our Life Science instruments for laboratory developed tests. In the past, the FDA has chosen to not enforce applicable regulations and has not reviewed such tests for approval. However, the FDA has recently issued guidance that it will begin enforcing its medical device requirements, including premarket submission requirements, to such tests. Any delay in, or failure to receive or maintain, clearance or approval for our products could prevent us from generating revenue from these products and adversely affect our business operations and financial results. Additionally, the FDA and other regulatory authorities have broad enforcement powers. Regulatory enforcement or inquiries, or other increased scrutiny on us, could affect the perceived safety and efficacy of our products and dissuade our customers from using our products. Many foreign governments have similar rules and regulations regarding the importation, registration, labeling, sale and use of our products. Such agencies may also impose new requirements that may require us to modify or re register products already on the market or otherwise impact our ability to market our products in those countries. For example, Europe is currently making its regulations for product labeling stricter, Russia has recently enacted more stringent medical product registration regulations, and we expect China, Brazil and India to impose more regulations that impact our product registrations. Increasing protectionism in such countries also impedes our ability to compete with local companies. For example, we may not be able to participate in certain public tenders in Russia because of increasing measures to restrict access to such tenders for companies without local manufacturing capabilities. Specifically, a resolution passed by Russia in February 2015 prohibits the procurement of certain types of medical devices by Russian state entities from foreign companies provided there are a sufficient number of 12 Russian manufacturers submitting tenders. Such regulations could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. We are also subject to government regulation of the use and handling of a number of materials and controlled substances. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration establishes registration, security, recordkeeping, reporting, storage, distribution and other requirements for controlled substances pursuant to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Failure to comply with present or future laws and regulations could result in substantial liability to us, suspension or cessation of our operations, restrictions on our ability to expand at our present locations or require us to make significant capital expenditures or incur other significant expenses. We cannot assure you that we will be able to integrate acquired companies, products or technologies into our company successfully, or we may not be able to realize the anticipated benefits from the acquisitions. As part of our overall business strategy, we pursue acquisitions of and investments in complementary companies, products and technologies. For information about our recent acquisitions, see "Overview" in Item 7 of this Annual Report. In order to be successful in these activities, we must, among other things assimilate the operations and personnel of acquired companies; retain acquired business customers; minimize potential disruption to our ongoing business; retain key technical and management personnel; integrate acquired companies into our strategic and financial plans; accurately assess the value of target companies, products and technologies; comply with new regulatory requirements; harmonize standards, controls, procedures and policies; minimize the impact to our relationships with our employees and customers; and assess, document and remediate any deficiencies in disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting. The benefits of any acquisition may prove to be less than anticipated and may not outweigh the costs reported in our financial statements. Completing any potential future acquisitions could cause significant diversion of our management time and resources. If we acquire new companies, products or technologies, we may be required to assume contingent liabilities or record impairment charges for goodwill and other intangible assets over time. We cannot assure you that we will successfully overcome these risks or any other problems we encounter in connection with any acquisitions, and any such acquisitions could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. Product quality and liability issues could harm our reputation and negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. We must adequately address quality issues associated with our products, including defects in our engineering, design and manufacturing processes, as well as defects in third party comp1nts included in our products. Our instruments, reagents and consumables are complex, and identifying the root cause of quality issues, especially those affecting reagents or third party comp1nts, is difficult. We may incur significant costs and expend substantial time in researching and remediating such issues. Quality issues could also delay our launching of new products. In addition, quality issues, unapproved uses of our products, or inadequate disclosure of risks related to our products, could result in product recalls or product liability or other claims being brought against us. These issues could harm our reputation, impair our relationship with existing customers and harm our ability to attract new customers, which could negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. 13 Lack of key personnel could hurt our business. Our products are very technical in nature. In general, only highly qualified and well trained scientists have the necessary skills to develop, market and sell our products, and many of our manufacturing positions require very specialized knowledge and skills. In addition, the global nature of our business also requires that we have sophisticated and experienced staff to comply with increasingly complex international laws and regulations. We face intense competition for these professionals from our competitors, customers, marketing partners and other companies throughout our industry. In particular, the job market in Northern California, where many of our employees are located, has improved significantly. If we do not offer competitive compensation and benefits, we may fail to retain or attract a sufficient number of qualified personnel, which could impair our ability to properly run our business. In some cases we rely on temporary personnel or consultants, and we may do so in the future. Such temporary personnel or consultants may lack the knowledge and or specific skills necessary for our business, require time to train without benefiting us through extended employment and increase our costs. In addition, as noted above, our strategic initiatives, such our internal restructuring and ERP implementation, may be burdensome and disruptive and lead to employee dissatisfaction and attrition. A reduction or interruption in the supply of comp1nts and raw materials could adversely affect our manufacturing operations and related product sales. The manufacture of many of our products requires the timely delivery of sufficient amounts of quality comp1nts and materials. We manufacture our products in numerous manufacturing facilities around the world. We acquire our comp1nts and materials from many suppliers in various countries. We work closely with our suppliers to ensure the continuity of supply but we cannot guarantee these efforts will always be successful. Further, while we seek to diversify our sources of comp1nts and materials, in certain instances we acquire comp1nts and materials from a sole supplier. In addition, due to the regulatory environment in which we operate, we may be unable to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for some comp1nts or materials. If our supply is reduced or interrupted, and we are unable to develop alternative sources for such supply, our ability to manufacture our products in a timely or cost effective manner could be adversely affected, which would adversely affect our ability to sell our products. If our information technology systems are disrupted, or if we fail to successfully implement, manage and integrate our information technology and reporting systems, our business, results of operations and financial condition could be harmed. Our information technology (IT) systems are an integral part of our business, and a serious disruption of our IT systems could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. We depend on our IT systems to process orders, manage inventory and collect accounts receivable. Our IT systems also allow us to efficiently purchase products from our suppliers and ship products to our customers on a timely basis, maintain cost effective operations and provide customer service. We cannot assure you that our contingency plans will allow us to operate at our current level of efficiency. Our ability to implement our business plan in a rapidly evolving market requires effective planning, reporting and analytical processes. We expect that we will need to continue to improve and further integrate our IT systems, reporting systems and operating procedures by training and educating our employees with respect to these improvements and integrations on an ongoing basis in order to effectively run our business. We may suffer interruptions in service, loss of data or reduced functionality when we upgrade or change systems. If we fail to successfully manage and integrate our IT systems, reporting systems and operating procedures, it could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. See also our risk factors regarding our ERP implementation and data security above. 14 Natural disasters, terrorist attacks, acts of war or other events beyond our control may cause damage or disruption to us and our employees, facilities, information systems, security systems, vendors and customers, which could significantly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. We have significant manufacturing and distribution facilities, including in the western United States, France, Switzerland, Germany and Singapore. In particular, the western United States has experienced a number of earthquakes, wildfires, floods, landslides and other natural disasters in recent years. These occurrences could damage or destroy our facilities which may result in interruptions to our business and losses that exceed our insurance coverage. In addition, strikes or other labor unrest at any of our sites or surrounding areas could cause disruption to our business. For example, we have experienced some delays in our supply of raw materials and shipments of products to customers due to recent labor unrest at the seaports in the western United States. If the situation continues or worsens, we may experience further disruption of our business or increased costs as we rely more on air freight. Acts of terrorism, bioterrorism, violence or war could also affect the markets in which we operate, our business operations and strategic plans. Political unrest may affect our sales in certain regions, such as in Southeast Asia, the Middle East and Eastern Europe. In particular, the recent political turmoil in Ukraine, along with the response of the Russian and U.S. governments to this situation, has the potential to impact our operations in Russia. Any of these events could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. Environmental, health and safety regulations and enforcement proceedings may negatively impact our business, results of operations and financial condition. Our operations are subject to federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws and regulations that govern such activities as transportation of goods, emissions to air and discharges to water, as well as handling and disposal practices for solid, hazardous and medical wastes. In addition to environmental laws that regulate our operations, we are also subject to environmental laws and regulations that create liability and clean up responsibility for spills, disposals or other releases of hazardous substances into the environment as a result of our operations or otherwise impacting real property that we own or operate. The environmental laws and regulations also subject us to claims by third parties for damages resulting from any spills, disposals or releases resulting from our operations or at any of our properties. We must also comply with various health and safety regulations in the United States and abroad in connection with our operations. We may in the future incur capital and operating costs to comply with currently existing laws and regulations, and possible new statutory enactments, and these expenditures may be significant. We have incurred, and may in the future incur, fines related to environmental matters and or liability for costs or damages related to spills or other releases of hazardous substances into the environment at sites where we have operated, or at off site locations where we have sent hazardous substances for disposal. We cannot assure you, however, that such matters or any future obligations to comply with environmental or health and safety laws and regulations will not adversely affect our business, results of operations or financial condition. We may be subject to additional tax liabilities. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and many foreign jurisdictions. We calculate our provision for income taxes in each jurisdiction in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes and in the ordinary course of business, there are many tax positions taken where the ultimate resolution is uncertain. We are subject to the examination of our tax positions in the United States and many other foreign jurisdictions. Taxing authorities have disagreed with our judgment in the past and may disagree with positions we take in the future resulting in assessments of additional taxes. Economic and political pressures to increase tax revenues in various jurisdictions may make resolving tax disputes more difficult. For example, in recent years, the tax authorities in Europe have disagreed with our tax positions related to hybrid debt, research and development credits, transfer pricing and indirect taxes, among others. We regularly assess the likelihood of the outcome resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. The results of an 15 audit or litigation could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements in the period or periods for which that determination is made. Changes in factors outside of our control, such as changes in tax laws or rates, changes in the interpretation of tax laws or changes in the jurisdictional mix of our earnings could adversely affect our financial position and results of operations. Our debt may restrict our future operations. We have substantial debt and have the ability to incur additional debt. As of December 31, 2014, we had approximately $436.0 million of outstanding indebtedness. In addition, we have a revolving credit facility that provides for up to $200.0 million , $5.0 million of which has been utilized for domestic standby letters of credit. Our incurrence of substantial amounts of debt may have important consequences. For instance, it could make it more difficult for us to satisfy our financial obligations, including those relating to our outstanding debt; require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to the payment of interest and principal due under our debt, which will reduce funds available for other business purposes; increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions; limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industries in which we operate; place us at a competitive disadvantage compared with some of our competitors that have less debt; and limit our ability to obtain additional financing required to fund working capital and capital expenditures and for other general corporate purposes. Our existing credit facility and the terms of our other debt instruments, including agreements we may enter in the future, contain or will contain covenants imposing significant restrictions on our business. These restrictions may affect our ability to operate our business and may limit our ability to take advantage of potential business opportunities as they arise. These covenants place restrictions on our ability to, among other things incur additional debt; acquire other businesses or assets through merger or purchase; create liens; make investments; enter into transactions with affiliates; sell assets; in the case of some of our subsidiaries, guarantee debt; and declare or pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions to stockholders. Our existing credit facility also requires that we comply with certain financial ratios, including a maximum consolidated leverage ratio test and a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio test. Our ability to comply with these covenants may be affected by events beyond our control, including prevailing economic, financial and industry conditions. The breach of any of these restrictions could result in a default. An event of default under our debt agreements would permit some of our lenders to declare all amounts borrowed from them to be due and payable, together with accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, acceleration of our other indebtedness may cause us to be unable to make interest payments on our outstanding notes and repay the principal amount of our outstanding notes or may cause the future subsidiary guarantors, if any, to be unable to make payments under the guarantees. We are subject to healthcare fraud and abuse laws and regulations and could face substantial penalties if we are unable to fully comply with such laws. We are subject to healthcare fraud and abuse regulation and enforcement by both the U.S. federal government and the U.S. states and foreign governments in which we conduct our business. These healthcare laws and regulations include, for example the U.S. federal Anti Kickback Statute, which prohibits, among other things, persons or entities from soliciting, receiving, offering or providing remuneration, directly or indirectly, in return for or to induce either the referral of an individual for, or the purchase order or recommendation of, any item or services for which payment may be made under a federal healthcare program such as the Medicare and Medicaid programs; 16 U.S. federal false claims laws, which prohibit, among other things, individuals or entities from knowingly presenting, or causing to be presented, claims for payment from Medicare, Medicaid, or other third party payors that are false or fraudulent. In addition, the U.S. federal government may assert that a claim including Item or services resulting from a violation of the federal Anti Kickback Statute constitutes a false or fraudulent claim for purposes of the false claims statutes; the U.S. Physician Payment Sunshine Act, which requires certain manufacturers of drugs, biologics, devices and medical supplies to record any transfers of value to U.S. physicians and U.S. teaching hospitals; HIPAA, as amended by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, which governs the conduct of certain electronic healthcare transactions and protects the security and privacy of protected health information; and state or foreign law equivalents of each of the U.S. federal laws above, such as anti kickback and false claims laws, which may apply to Item or services reimbursed by any third party payor, including commercial insurers. These laws will continue to impose administrative, cost and compliance burdens on us. The shifting compliance environment and the need to build and maintain robust systems to comply with multiple jurisdictions with different compliance and or reporting requirements increases the possibility that a healthcare company may violate 1 or more of these requirements. In addition, any action against us for violation of these laws, even if we successfully defend against it, could cause us to incur significant legal expenses and divert our management attention from the operation of our business. If our operations are found to be in violation of any of the laws described above or any other governmental regulations that apply to us, we may be subject to penalties, including civil and criminal penalties, damages, fines, exclusion from the Medicare and Medicaid programs, and the curtailment or restructuring of our operations, any of which could adversely affect our ability to operate our business, results of operations and financial condition. We may incur losses in future periods due to write downs in the value of financial instruments. We have positions in a variety of financial instruments including asset backed securities and other similar instruments. Financial markets are quite volatile and the markets for these securities can be illiquid. The value of these securities will continue to be impacted by external market factors including default rates, changes in the value of the underlying property, such as residential or commercial real estate, rating agency actions, the prices at which observable market transactions occur and the financial strength of various entities, such as financial guarantors who provide insurance for the securities. Should we need to convert these positions to cash, we may not be able to sell these instruments without significant losses due to current debtor financial conditions or other market considerations. Regulations related to conflict minerals could adversely impact our business. As part of the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the SEC adopted disclosure requirements regarding the use of certain minerals, known as conflict minerals, which are mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and adjoining countries, as well as procedures regarding a manufacturer's efforts to identify the sourcing of such minerals and metals produced from those minerals. The European Union is considering additional reporting obligations. We have incurred, and will continue to incur, additional costs in order to comply with the SEC disclosure requirements. In addition, we might incur further costs due to possible changes to our products, processes, or sources of supply as a consequence of our due diligence activities. As our supply chain is complex, we may not be able to sufficiently verify the origins of the specified minerals used in our products through our due diligence procedures, which may harm our reputation. In addition, we may encounter challenges to satisfy those customers who require that all of the comp1nts of our products be certified as DRC conflict free , which could place us at a competitive disadvantage if we do not do so. We filed our report for the calendar year 2013 with the SEC on May 30, 2014. 17 Risks related to our common stock A significant majority of our voting stock is held by the Schwartz family, which could lead to conflicts of interest. We have 2 classes of voting stock Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. With a few exceptions, holders of Class A and Class B Common Stock vote as a single class. When voting as a single class, each share of Class A Common Stock is entitled to 1 tenth of a vote, while each share of Class B Common Stock has 1 vote. In the election or removal of directors, the classes vote separately and the holders of Class A Common Stock are entitled to elect 25% of the Board of Directors, with holders of Class B Common Stock electing the remaining directors. As of February 17, 2015, the Schwartz family collectively held approximately 15% of our Class A Common Stock and 94% of our Class B Common Stock. As a result, the Schwartz family is able to elect a majority of the directors, effect fundamental changes in our direction and control matters affecting us, including the determination of business opportunities that may be suitable for our company. The Schwartz family may exercise its control over us according to interests that are different from other investors or debtors interests. In particular, this concentration of ownership and voting power may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change in control of our company. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 18 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
