CIK: 1388658
Company Name: IRHYTHM TECHNOLOGIES INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2019-03-04
Accession Number: 0001564590-19-005924


Item 1 Business. I PART 1 You should read this Annual Report on Form 10 K and the documents that we reference in this Annual Report on Form 10 K and have filed with the SEC as exhibits to the Annual Report on Form 10 K with the understanding that our actual future results, levels of activity, performance and events and circumstances may be materially different from what we expect. You should not rely upon forward looking statements as predictions of future events. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee that the future results, levels of activity, performance or events and circumstances reflected in the forward looking statements will be achieved or occur. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward looking statements for any reason after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10 K to conform these statements to actual results or to changes in our expectations. We believe that it is important to communicate our future expectations to our investors. However, there may be events in the future that we are not able to accurately predict or control and that may cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward looking statements. These forward looking statements are based on management current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about our business and the industry in which we operate and management beliefs and assumptions and are not guarantees of future performance or development and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that are in some cases beyond our control. As a result, any or all of our forward looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10 K may turn out to be inaccurate. Factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from current expectations include, among other things, those listed under Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Potential investors are urged to consider these factors carefully in evaluating the forward looking statements. These forward looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. We assume no obligation to update or revise these forward looking statements for any reason, even if new information becomes available in the future. developments and projections relating to our competitors or our industry our financial performance our ability to identify and develop new and planned products and acquire new products our expectations regarding the time during which we will be an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act our estimates of our expenses, ongoing losses, future revenue, capital requirements and our needs for, or ability to obtain, additional financing our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our products our ability to retain and recruit key personnel, including the continued development of a sales and marketing infrastructure our expectations regarding revenue, cost of revenue, cost of service per device, operating expenses, including research and development expense, sales and marketing expense and general and administrative expenses our expectations regarding the size of our sales organization and expansion of our sales and marketing efforts in international geographies our expectations regarding government and third party payor coverage and reimbursement the expected growth of our business and our organization our plans to modify our current products, or develop new products, to address additional indications plans to conduct further clinical studies This Annual Report on Form 10 K contains forward looking statements concerning our business, operations and financial performance and condition, as well as our plans, objectives and expectations for our business, operations and financial performance and condition. Any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical facts may be deemed to be forward looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward looking statements by terminology such as anticipate, assume, believe, contemplate, continue, could, due, estimate, expect, goal, intend, may, objective, plan, predict, potential, positi1d, seek, should, target, will, would and other similar expressions that are predictions of or indicate future events and future trends, or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These forward looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS ii 97 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules Item 15. V 96 Principal Accounting Fees and Services Item 14. 96 Item 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item 13 96 Stockholder Matters Item 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Item 12 96 Item 11 Executive Compensation Item 11 96 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item 10. II 95 Other Information Item 9B. 95 Controls and Procedures Item 9A. 95 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure Item 9. 67 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data Item 8. 66 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Item 7A. 55 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7. 54 Selected Consolidated Financial Data Item 6. 52 of Equity Securities Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases Item 5. I 51 Mine Safety Disclosures Item 4. 51 Item 3 Legal Proceedings Item 3 51 Item 2 Properties
