CIK: 313143
Company Name: HAEMONETICS CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2012-05-22
Accession Number: 0000313143-12-000071


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Company Overview Haem1tics is a global healthcare company dedicated to providing innovative blood management solutions to our customers. Our comprehensive portfolio of integrated devices, information management, and consulting services offers blood management solutions for each facet of the blood supply chain, helping improve clinical outcomes and reduce costs for blood and plasma collectors, hospitals, and patients around the world. We believe that through proper blood management, our products and services help prevent a transfusion to a patient who does not need 1 and provide the right blood product, at the right time, in the right dose to the patient who does. Blood and its comp1nts (plasma, platelets, and red cells) have several vital and frequently life saving clinical applications. Plasma is manufactured into pharmaceuticals to treat a variety of illnesses and hereditary disorders such as hemophilia. Red cells treat trauma patients or patients undergoing surgery with high blood loss, such as open heart surgery or organ transplant. Platelets treat cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Haem1tics is committed to helping our customers create and maintain a safe and efficient blood supply chain. Specifically, we develop and market a wide range of systems used with plasma and blood donors to automate the collection and processing of blood into its comp1nts. We also develop and market a variety of systems to hospitals that automate the cleaning and reinfusion of a surgical patient's blood during surgery, automate the tracking and distribution of blood in the hospital, and enhance blood diagnostics. We also market information technology platforms to promote efficient and compliant operations for all our customer groups. Haem1tics was founded in 1971 as a medical device company a pi1er and market leader in developing and manufacturing automated blood comp1nt collection devices and surgical blood salvage devices. In May 1991, we completed an initial public offering and to this day remain an independent company. Several years ago, we embarked on a strategy to expand our markets and product portfolio to offer more comprehensive blood management solutions to our customers. Through internal product development and external acquisitions, we have significantly expanded our product offerings. Our most recent notable completed acquisition was Global Med, which was acquired in fiscal 2010, and significantly expanded our software solution offerings. In April 2012, we announced 2 acquisitions that will provide us with a commercial presence in all aspects of the whole blood collection market, a market in which historically we have not meaningfully participated. We entered into a definitive agreement to acquire the business assets of the blood collection, filtration and processing product lines of Pall Corporation for $551 million. The blood processing systems and equipment to be acquired are for use in transfusion medicine and include Pall's manufacturing facilities in Covina, California; Tijuana, Mexico; Ascoli, Italy and a portion of Pall's assets in Fajardo, Puerto Rico. Approximately 1,300 employees will be transferred to Haem1tics. We also entered into a definitive agreement to acquire the business assets of Hemerus Medical, LLC, a Minnesota based company that develops innovative technologies for the collection of whole blood, and processing and storage of blood comp1nts. Under the terms of the agreement, we will pay up to $27 million contingent upon on certain regulatory approvals. We expect both acquisitions to close in the second quarter of fiscal 2013 Today, we offer devices and related consumables, information technology software platforms, and consulting services. By better understanding our customers needs, we are creating comprehensive blood management solutions for blood collectors and healthcare systems in more than 97 countries around the world. Industry Segments We serve 3 market segments Plasma fractionators (bio pharma), Blood Collectors, and Hospitals. We report revenues for multiple product lines under four global product categories Plasma, Blood Center, Hospital, and Software Solutions . Plasma includes plasma collection devices and consumables. Blood Center includes blood collection and processing devices and consumables. Hospital includes surgical blood salvage and blood demand diagnostic devices and consumables. Software Solutions includes information technology platforms and consulting services provided to all 3 market segments. Although we address our customers' needs through multiple product lines, we manage our business as 1 operating segment the design, manufacture, implementation, support and marketing of blood management solutions. Our chief operating decision maker uses consolidated financial results to make operating and strategic decisions. Design and manufacturing processes, as well as economic characteristics and the regulatory environment in which we operate, are largely the same for all product lines. The financial information required for the operating segment is included herein in Note 15 of the financial statements, entitled Segment, Geographic and Customer Information . 1 Table of Contents Plasma The Plasma Collection Market for Fractionation Human plasma is collected and processed by pharmaceutical companies into therapeutic and diagnostic products that aid in the treatment of immune diseases and coagulation disorders. Plasma is also used to aid patients with extreme blood loss such as trauma victims. Automated plasma collection technology allows for the safe and efficient collection of plasma. We manufacture and market plasma collection devices, but do not make plasma derived pharmaceuticals. Many bio pharmaceutical companies are vertically integrated in all comp1nts of their business and thus are now collecting and fractionating the plasma required to manufacture their pharmaceuticals. This vertical integration paved the way for highly efficient plasma supply chain management and the plasma industry leverages information technology to manage operations from the point of plasma donation to fractionation to the production of the final product. Haem1tics' Plasma Products (reported as "plasma" product line) Our portfolio of products and services is designed to support multiple facets of plasma collector operations. We have a long standing commitment to understanding our customers' collection and fractionation processes. As a result, we deliver product quality and reliability; design equipment that is durable, dependable, and easy to use; and provide comprehensive training support and strong business continuity practices. Historically, plasma for fractionation was collected manually, which was time consuming, labor intensive, produced relatively poor yields, and posed risk to donors. Today, the vast majority of plasma collections worldwide are performed using automated collection technology because it is safer and more cost effective. With our PCS brand automated collection technology, more plasma can be collected during any 1 donation event because the other blood comp1nts are returned to the donor through the sterile disposable sets used for the blood donation procedure. We offer 1 stop shopping to our plasma collection customers, enabling them to source from us the full range of products necessary for plasma collection and storage, including PCS brand plasma collection equipment and consumables, plasma collection containers, and intravenous solutions. We also offer a robust portfolio of integrated information technology platforms for plasma customers to manage their donors, operations, and supply chain. Our products automate the donor interview and qualification process; streamline the workflow process in the plasma center; provide the controls necessary to evaluate donor suitability; determine the ability to release units collected; and manage unit distribution. With our software solutions, plasma collectors can manage processes across the plasma supply chain, react quickly to business changes, and identify opportunities to reduce costs. Our plasma disposables product line represented 35.5% , 336% , and 36.0% of our total revenue in fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Blood Center The Blood Collection Market for Transfusion There are millions of blood donations throughout the world every year that produce blood products for transfusion to surgical, trauma, or chronically ill patients. Patients typically receive only the blood comp1nts necessary to treat a particular clinical condition for example, red cells to surgical patients, platelets to cancer patients, and plasma to trauma victims. Platelet therapy is frequently used to alleviate the effects of chemotherapy and help patients with bleeding disorders. Red cells are frequently transfused to patients to replace blood lost during surgery. Red cells are also transfused to patients with blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia or aplastic anemia. Plasma, in addition to its role in creating life saving pharmaceuticals, is frequently transfused to trauma victims and to replace blood volume lost during surgery. Worldwide demand for blood is expected to continue to rise modestly as the population ages and more patients have need for and access to medical therapies that require blood transfusions. Furthermore, many of the highly populated emerging markets countries are advancing their healthcare coverage, and as greater numbers of people gain access to more advanced medical treatment, additional demand for blood comp1nts, plasma derived drugs, and surgical procedures increases directly. This increasing demand for blood is partially offset by the development of less invasive, lower blood loss procedures. Haem1tics is a leader in automated comp1nt blood collections. While this market is smaller than the whole blood collection market, we believe that today it is a highly effective way of collecting and distributing blood products. In this procedure, whole blood does not need to be transferred to a central laboratory for separation. Instead, the blood 2 Table of Contents separation process is automated and occurs in real time while a person is donating blood. In this separation method, only the specific blood comp1nt targeted is collected, and the remaining comp1nts are returned to the blood donor. Automated blood comp1nt collection allows significantly more of the targeted blood comp1nt to be collected during a donation event, especially red cells where our automated system supports collection of 2 units from eligible donors. We believe automation improves blood collection safety and efficiency, as well as regulatory compliance. Integrated information technology and blood management systems like the kind offered by Haem1tics, are impacting the management of blood collection centers as blood collectors respond to demands for efficient blood supply chain management, seek to lower costs, and respond to ever increasing regulatory restrictions. However, most donations worldwide are non automated procedures, also referred to as manual or whole blood donations. In this process, whole blood is collected from the donor and then transported to a central laboratory where it is separated into its comp1nts red cells, platelets and plasma. Through the end of fiscal 2012, Haem1tics had not meaningfully participated in this market. The acquisitions announced in April 2012 will accelerate Haem1tics' entry into the whole blood collection market. Haem1tics Blood Center Products (reported as blood center product line) Today, Haem1tics offers automated blood comp1nt collection systems to blood collection centers to collect blood products as efficiently and cost effectively as possible. We market the MCS (Multicomp1nt Collection System) brand apheresis equipment which is designed to collect specific blood comp1nts and return the unwanted comp1nts to the donor. The MCS automated platelet system collects 1 or more therapeutic doses of platelets during a single donation by a volunteer blood donor. The MCS 2 unit protocol or double red cell collection device helps blood collectors optimize the collection of red cells by automating the blood separation function, eliminating the need for laboratory processing, and enabling the collection of 2 units of red cells from a single donor thus maximizing the amount of red cells collected per eligible donor and minimizing red cell shortages in countries where this problem exists. Blood collectors can also use the MCS system to collect 1 unit of red cells and a "jumbo" (double) unit of plasma, or 1 unit of red cells and 1 unit of platelets from a single donor. Better balancing of demand with supply will also mitigate shortages of blood comp1nts and potentially reduce collection costs. Our software solutions, such as our SafeTrace and El Dorado Donor donation and blood unit management systems, span blood center operations and automate and track operations from the recruitment of the blood donor to the disposition of the blood product. Our Hemasphere software solution provides support for more efficient blood drive planning, and Donor Doc and e Donor software help to improve recruitment and retention. Combined, our solutions help blood collectors improve the safety, regulatory compliance, and efficiency of blood collection and supply. Our blood center disposables product line represented 29.7% , 30.0% , and 30.8% of our total revenue in fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Hospital (reported as hospital product line) The Transfusion Market for Hospitals Loss of blood is common in open heart, trauma, transplant, vascular, and orthopedic procedures, and the need for transfusion of oxygen carrying red cells to make up for lost blood volume is routine. Patients commonly receive donor blood, referred to as allogeneic blood , which carries various risks including risk of transfusion with the wrong blood type; risk of transfusion reactions including death, but more commonly chills, fevers or other side effects that can prolong a patient recovery; and risk of transfusion of blood with a blood borne disease or infectious agent. An alternative to allogeneic blood is surgical blood salvage, also known as autotransfusion, which reduces or eliminates a patient need for blood donated from others and ensures that the patient receives the safest blood possible his or her own. Surgical blood salvage involves the collection of a patient own blood during and after surgery, for reinfusion to that patient. Blood is sucti1d from the surgical site, processed and washed through a centrifuge based system that yields concentrated red cells available for transfusion back to the patient. This process occurs in a sterile, closed circuit, single use consumable set that is fitted into an electromechanical device. We market our surgical blood salvage products to hospital based medical specialists, primarily cardiovascular, orthopedic, and trauma surgeons, and to surgical suite service providers. Haem1tics Hospital Products Haem1tics offers a range of blood management solutions that significantly 3 Table of Contents improve a hospital's systems for acquiring blood, storing it in the hospital, and dispensing it efficiently and correctly. Over the last few years, hospitals have become more aware of their need to control costs and improve patient safety by managing blood more effectively. Our products and integrated solution platforms help hospitals optimize performance of blood acquisition, storage, and distribution. Our TEG Thromobelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer system is a blood diagnostic instrument that measures a patient hemostasis or the ability to form and maintain blood clots. By understanding a patient clotting ability, clinicians can better plan for the patient care, deciding in advance whether to start or discontinue use of certain drugs or, determine the likelihood of the patient's need for a transfusion and which blood comp1nts will be most effective in stopping bleeding. Such planning supports the best possible clinical outcome, which can lead to lower hospital costs through a reduction in unnecessary donor blood transfusions, reduced adverse transfusion reactions, shorter intensive care unit and hospital stays, and exploratory surgeries. The Cell Saver system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to procedures that involve rapid, high volume blood loss, such as cardiovascular surgeries. It has become the standard of care for high blood loss surgeries. In fiscal 2012, we launched our newest device, the Cell Saver Elite system, which is our most advanced autotransfusion option to minimize allogeneic blood use for surgeries with medium to high blood loss. The cardioPAT system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to open heart surgeries when there is less blood loss during surgery, but where the blood loss continues post surgery. The OrthoPAT surgical blood salvage system is targeted to procedures, such as orthopedic, that involve slower, lower volume blood loss that often occurs well after surgery. These systems are designed to remain with the patient following surgery, to recover blood and produce a washed red cell product for autotransfusion. Their Quick Connect features permits customers to utilize the blood processing set selectively, depending on the patient need. Our software products help hospitals track and safely deliver stored blood products. SafeTrace Tx is our software solution that helps manage blood product inventory, perform patient cross matching, and manage transfusions. In addition, our BloodTrack suite of solutions manages tracking and control of blood products from the hospital blood center through to transfusion to the patient. Smart refrigerators located in or near operating suites, emergency rooms, and other parts of the hospital dispense blood units with secure control and automated traceability for efficient documentation. With our more comprehensive offerings, hospitals are better able to manage processes across the blood supply chain and identify increased opportunities to reduce costs and enhance processes. Our IMPACT Online web based software platform, which monitors and measures improvements in a hospital blood management practices, provides hospitals with a baseline view of their blood management metrics and helps monitor transfusion rates. If needed by a customer, we also offer business consulting solutions to support process excellence and blood management efforts. We also provide blood management assessment tools to hospitals that enable our customers to monitor their progress in order to continually improve their blood management performance. Our hospital disposables product line represented 16.6% , 18.0% , and 19.2% of our total revenue in fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Software Solutions Haem1tics' Software Products and Services To complement our device and disposable products, we have a suite of integrated software solutions that track and monitor blood units along all points in the supply chain, including blood drive planning, donor recruitment and retention, blood processing, blood distribution, and transfusion management. For our plasma customers, we also provide information technology platforms for managing administrative functions and distribution at plasma fractionation facilities. While each Haem1tics information technology platform can be used as a stand al1, the mission to provide "Arm to Arm " blood management is designed to be executed by the integration of these platforms. What more, the ability to evaluate data based on the integration of these systems allows customers to continually improve their business processes. These systems are the backb1 of Haem1tics' overall commitment to improving blood management systems globally. We offer a range of software consulting services that focus on education, validation, implementation, and technical support for our customers, as well as business consulting services that support process excellence, donor recruitment, business design, and improved blood management. We also provide blood management assessment tools to hospitals. Integrated Blood Management Solutions When combining our software solutions with our devices, we meet our goal to give customers powerful tools for improving blood management while driving growth of our consumables. For example, a hospital may use our consulting services to analyze its blood management practices and recommend changes in practice. Then, the hospital can leverage our systems and services to analyze blood utilization, manage 4 Table of Contents blood inventory, and potentially reduce demand for donated blood. Finally, the hospital can use our IMPACT Online blood management business intelligence portal to monitor the results of its new blood management practices. The positive patient impact and reduced costs from this integrated blood management approach can be significant. Likewise, by understanding best practices, blood demand, and discreet patient needs, hospitals can more frequently deploy our devices for hemostasis diagnosis and cell salvage to ensure best patient care. While each of our products, platforms, and services can be marketed individually, our blood management solutions vision is to offer integrated closed loop solutions for blood supply chain management. Our software solutions information technology platforms and consulting services can be combined with our devices and sold through our plasma, blood center, and hospital sales forces. Our software solutions product line represented 9.7% , 9.9% , and 5.6% of our total revenue in fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Marketing Sales Distribution We market and sell our products to commercial plasma collectors, blood systems and independent blood centers, hospitals and hospital service providers, and national health organizations through our own direct sales force (including full time sales representatives and clinical specialists) as well as independent distributors. Sales representatives target the primary decision makers within each of those organizations. United States In fiscal 2012 , 2011 , and 2010 approximately 48.4% , 46.9% , and 47.1% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated in the U.S., where we primarily use a direct sales force to sell our products. Outside the United States In fiscal 2012 , 2011 , and 2010 approximately 516% , 531% , and 529% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated through sales to non U.S. customers. Our direct sales force outside the United States includes full time sales representatives and clinical specialists in Japan, Europe, Taiwan and China. We also use various distributors to market our products in parts of Europe, Russia, South America, the Middle East, Africa, and the Far East. Additionally, we have established offices with marketing personnel who work with our distributors in Russia, Lebanon, India and Brazil. Research and Development Our research and development ( R&D ) centers in the United States and Switzerland ensure that protocol variations are incorporated to closely match local customer requirements. In addition, our Haem1tics Software Solutions also maintains development operations in El Dorado Hills, California; Edmonton, Canada; and Lim1st, France. Customer collaboration is also an important part of our technical strength and competitive advantage. These collaboration customers and transfusion experts provide us with ideas for new products and applications, enhanced protocols, and potential test sites as well as objective evaluations and expert opinions regarding technical and performance issues. The development of blood comp1nt separation products and extracorporeal blood typing and screening systems has required us to maintain technical expertise in various engineering disciplines, including mechanical, electrical, software, and biomedical engineering and material science. Innovations resulting from these various engineering efforts enable us to develop systems that are faster, smaller, and more user friendly, or that incorporate additional features important to our customer base. Our expenditures for R&D were $36.8 million for fiscal 2012 ( 5.1% of net revenues), $327 million for fiscal 2011 ( 4.8% of net revenues) and $26.4 million ( 4.1% of net revenues) for fiscal 2010. All R&D costs are expensed as incurred and we expect to continue to invest resources in R&D. In fiscal 2012, R&D resources were allocated to supporting a next generation orthopedic perioperative autotransfusion device, an automated whole blood collection system, and several other projects to enhance our current product portfolio. Manufacturing Our principal manufacturing operations are located in Braintree, Massachusetts; Leetsdale, Pennsylvania; Union, South Carolina; Draper, Utah; Niles, Illinois; and Bothwell, Scotland. In general, our production activities occur in controlled settings or clean room environments. Each step of the manufacturing and assembly process is quality checked, qualified, and validated. Critical process steps and materials are documented to ensure that every unit is produced consistently and meets performance requirements. 5 Table of Contents Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposable products. Contracts with our suppliers help mitigate some of the short term effects of price volatility in this market. However, increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Some comp1nt sets manufacturing is performed by outside contractors according to our specifications. We maintain important relationships with 2 Japanese manufacturers that produce finished consumables in Singapore, Japan, and Thailand. Certain parts and comp1nts are purchased from various single sources. If necessary, we believe that, in most cases, alternative sources of supply are available, and could be secured within a relatively short period of time. Nevertheless, an interruption in supply could temporarily interfere with production schedules and affect our operations. All of our other equipment and disposable manufacturing sites are certified to the ISO 13485 standard and to the Medical Device Directive allowing placement of the CE mark of conformity. Each blood processing machine is designed in house and assembled from comp1nts that are either manufactured by us or by others to our specifications. The completed instruments are programmed, calibrated, and tested to ensure compliance with our engineering and quality assurance specifications. Inspection checks are conducted throughout the manufacturing process to verify proper assembly and functionality. When mechanical and electronic comp1nts are sourced from outside vendors, those vendors must meet detailed qualification and process control requirements. Intellectual Property We consider our intellectual property rights to be important to our business. We rely on patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws, as well as provisions in our agreements with third parties to protect our intellectual property rights. We hold patents in the United States and many international jurisdictions on some of our machines, processes, disposables and related technologies. These patents cover certain elements of our systems, including protocols employed in our equipment and certain aspects of our processing chambers and disposables. Our patents may cover current products, products in markets we plan to enter, or products in markets we plan to license, or the patents may be defensive in that they are directed to technologies not currently embodied in our current products. We also license patent rights from third parties that cover technologies that we use or plan to use in our business. To maintain our competitive position, we rely on the technical expertise and know how of our personnel and on our patent rights. We pursue an active and formal program of invention disclosure and patent application in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. We own various trademarks that have been registered in the United States and certain other countries. Our policy is to obtain patent and trademark rights in the U.S. and foreign countries where such rights are available and we believe it is commercially advantageous to do so. However, the standards for international protection of intellectual property vary widely. We cannot assure that pending patent and trademark applications will result in issued patents and registered trademarks, that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged or circumvented by competitors, or that our patents will not be found to be invalid. Competition We have established a record of innovation and leadership in each of the areas in which we compete. Although we compete directly with others in individual areas of our business, no other company offers the complete range of integrated solutions designed to meet customers' needs across the entire blood supply chain. To remain competitive, we must continue to develop and acquire cost effective new products, information technology platforms, and business services. We believe that our ability to maintain a competitive advantage will continue to depend on a combination of factors. Some factors are largely within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety and cost effectiveness and continual and rigorous documentation of clinical performance. In the automated plasma collection market, we principally compete with Fenwal, Inc. on the basis of quality, reliability, ease of use, services and technical features of systems, and on the long term cost effectiveness of equipment and disposables. In China, the market is populated by local producers of a product that is intended to be similar to ours. Recently, those competitors have expanded to markets beyond China, into European and South American countries. In April 2011, Terumo Medical Corporation, a global competitor in the automated plasma and platelet collection markets, acquired Caridian BCT (formerly Gambro BCT). The resulting entity, Terumo BCT, is 1 of our major competitors in automated platelet collection. Another major competitor in this area is Fenwal. In the automated platelet collection business, competition is based on continual performance improvement, as measured by the time and efficiency of platelet collection and the quality of the platelets collected. Each of these companies has taken a different technological approach in designing their systems for automated platelet collection. In the platelet collection market, we also compete with whole blood collections from which pooled platelets are derived. 6 Table of Contents Caridian BCT and Fenwal are also competitors in the automated red cell collection market. However, it is important to note that only about 5% of the 40 million units of red cells collected worldwide and about 10% of the 15 million units of red cells collected in the U.S. annually are collected via automation. Therefore, we also compete with the traditional method of collecting red cells from the manual collection of whole blood. As discussed in our Company Overview , we will have meaningful participation in whole blood collections with the acquisitions announced in April 2012 We compete on the basis of total cost, type specific collection, process control, product quality, and inventory management. In the cell processing market, competition is based on level of automation, labor intensiveness, and system type (open versus closed). Open systems may be weaker in good manufacturing process compliance. Moreover, blood processed through open systems has a 24 hour shelf life. We have an open system cell processor as well as a closed system cell processor which gives blood processed through it a 14 day shelf life. We compete with Caridian BCT's open systems in this market. Within our hospital business, in the diagnostics market, the TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer is used primarily in surgical applications. 1 direct competitor, ROTEM, is a competitor in Europe and in the United States. Other competitive technologies include standard coagulation tests and platelet function testing. The TEG competes with other laboratory tests based on its ability to provide a complete picture of a patient's hemostasis at a single point in time, and the ability to measure the clinically relevant platelet function for an individual patient. In the intraoperative surgical blood salvage market, competition is based on reliability, ease of use, service, support, and price. For high volume platforms, each manufacturer's technology is similar, and our Cell Saver technology competes principally with Medtronic, Fresenius, and Sorin Biomedica. Our portfolio includes cardioPAT and OrthoPAT, which can be used intraoperatively for cases in which a relatively low volume of blood loss is expected. In the perioperative surgical blood salvage market, our OrthoPAT and cardioPAT systems compete primarily against non automated processing systems whose end product is an unwashed red blood cell unit for transfusion to the patient. The OrthoPAT and cardioPAT systems are the only systems designed for portability and post operative use that wash and concentrate the red cells prior to infusion. A significant portion of a patients' total blood loss can occur postoperatively, especially in total joint replacement surgery, and this drives the value proposition of the PAT systems. In the software market, we compete with MAK Systems, Mediware, and home grown applications. These companies provide software to blood and plasma collectors and to hospitals for managing donors, collections, and blood units. N1 of these companies competes in other Haem1tics markets. Our technical staff is highly skilled, but many competitors have substantially greater financial resources and larger technical staffs at their disposal. There can be no assurance that competitors will not direct substantial efforts and resources toward the development and marketing of products competitive with those of Haem1tics. Significant Customers The Japanese Red Cross Society (JRC) represented 137% and 14.2% of our net revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011 , respectively. Additionally, a global healthcare customer ("Customer B") represented approximately 110% of our net revenues in fiscal 2012 Government Regulation The products we manufacture and market are subject to regulation by the Center of Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ) and the Center of Devices and Radiological Health ( CDRH ) of the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ), and other non United States regulatory bodies. All medical devices introduced to the United States market since 1976 are required by the FDA, as a condition of marketing, to secure either a 510(k) pre market notification clearance or an approved Pre market Approval Application ( PMA ). In the United States, software used to automate blood center operations and blood collections and to track those comp1nts through the system are considered by FDA to be medical devices, subject to 510(k) pre market notification. Intravenous solutions (blood anticoagulants and solutions for storage of red blood cells) marketed by us for use with our automated systems requires us to obtain from CBER an approved New Drug Application ( NDA ) or Abbreviated New Drug Application ( ANDA ). A 510(k) pre market clearance indicates FDA agreement with an applicant determination that the product for which clearance is sought is substantially equivalent to another legally marketed medical device. The process of obtaining a 510(k) clearance may involve the submission of clinical data and supporting information. The process of obtaining NDA approval for solutions is likely to take much longer than 510(k) clearances because the FDA review process is more complicated. The FDA Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, require the maintenance of certain records and provide for inspections of our facilities. There are also certain requirements of state, local 7 Table of Contents and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacturing and marketing of our products. We maintain customer complaint files, record all lot numbers of disposable products, and conduct periodic audits to assure compliance with FDA regulations. We place special emphasis on customer training and advise all customers that device operation should be undertaken only by qualified personnel. The FDA can ban certain medical devices; detain or seize adulterated or misbranded medical devices; order repair, replacement or refund of these devices; and require notification of health professionals and others with regard to medical devices that present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also enjoin and restrain certain violations of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act pertaining to medical devices, or initiate action for criminal prosecution of such violations. We are also subject to regulation in the countries outside the United States in which we market our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directives, which create a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to obtain CE Marking for their products. Outside of the EU, many of the regulations applicable to our products are similar to those of the FDA. However, the national health or social security organizations of certain countries require our products to be registered by those countries before they can be marketed in those countries. We have complied with these regulations and have obtained such registrations where we market our products. Federal, state and foreign regulations regarding the manufacture and sale of products such as ours are subject to change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, such changes might have on our business. We are also subject to various environmental, health and general safety laws, directives and regulations both in the U.S. and abroad. Our operations, like those of other medical device companies, involve the use of substances regulated under environmental laws, primarily in manufacturing and sterilization processes. We believe that sound environmental, health and safety performance contributes to our competitive strength while benefiting our customers, shareholders and employees. Environmental Matters Failure to comply with international, federal and local environmental protection laws or regulations could have an adverse impact upon our business or could require material capital expenditures. We continue to monitor changes in U.S. and international environmental regulations that may present a significant risk to the business, including laws or regulations relating to the manufacture or sale of products using plastics. Action plans are developed to mitigate identified risks. Employees As of March 31, 2012 , we employed the full time equivalent of 2,337 persons assigned to the following functional areas manufacturing, 932 ; sales and marketing, 463 ; general and administrative, 439 ; research and development, 237 ; and quality control and field service, 266 . We consider our employee relations to be satisfactory. Availability of Reports and Other Information All of our corporate governance materials, including the Principles of Corporate Governance, the Business Conduct Policy and the charters of the Audit, Compensation, and Nominating and Governance Committees are published on the Investor Relations section of our website at http phx.corporate ir.net phoenix.zhtml?c=72118&p=irol IRHome. On this web site the public can also access, free of charge, our annual, quarterly and current reports and other documents filed or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. 8 Table of Contents Financial Information about Foreign and Domestic Operations and Export Sales The financial information required by this Item 1s included herein in Note 15 of the financial statements, entitled Segment, Geographic and Customer Information . Sales to the Japanese Red Cross and Customer B accounted for 137% and 110% of net revenues in fiscal 2012 , respectively. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of our net revenues. For more information concerning significant customers, see the subheading of Note 2 of the financial statements entitled, Concentration of Credit Risk and Significant Customers . Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Information Statements contained in this report, as well as oral statements we make which are prefaced with the words may, will, expect, anticipate, continue, estimate, project, intend, designed, and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect our future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. These statements are based on our current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which we can give no firm assurance. Further, any forward looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. As it is not possible to predict every new factor that may emerge, forward looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of our actual future financial condition or results. These forward looking statements, like any forward looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated. Such risks and uncertainties include technological advances in the medical field and our standards for transfusion medicine and our ability to successfully implement products that incorporate such advances and standards, product demand and market acceptance of our products, regulatory uncertainties, the effect of economic and political conditions, the impact of competitive products and pricing, the impact of industry consolidation, foreign currency exchange rates, changes in customers ordering patterns, the effect of industry consolidation as seen in the plasma market, the effect of communicable diseases, the effect of uncertainties in markets outside the U.S. (including Europe and Asia) in which we operate and such other risks described under Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report. The foregoing list should not be construed as exhaustive. 9 Table of Contents ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS Set forth below are the risks that we believe are material to our investors. This section contains forward looking statements. You should refer to the explanation of the qualifications and limitations on forward looking statements beginning on page 9 and 38. If we are unable to successfully expand our product lines through internal research & development and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Continued growth of our business depends on our maintaining a pipeline of profitable new products and successful improvements to our existing products. This requires accurate market analysis and carefully targeted application of intellectual and financial resources toward technological innovation or acquisition of new products. The creation and adoption of technological advances is only 1 step. We must also efficiently develop the technology into a product which confers a competitive advantage, represents a cost effective solution or provides improved clinical outcomes. The risks of missteps and set backs are an inherent part of the innovation and development processes in the medical device industry. If we are unable to successfully grow our business through marketing partnerships and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Promising partnerships and acquisitions may not be completed for reasons such as competition among prospective partners or buyers, our inability to reach satisfactory terms, or the need for regulatory approvals. Any acquisition that we complete may be dilutive to earnings and require that we invest significant resources. The economic environment may constrain our ability to access the capital needed for acquisitions and other capital investments. Failure to integrate acquired businesses into our operations successfully could adversely affect our business. The integration of the operations of acquired businesses requires significant efforts, including the coordination of information technologies, research and development, sales and marketing, operations, manufacturing and finance. These efforts result in additional expenses and involve significant amounts of managements' time. Factors that affect the success of acquisitions include the strength of the acquired company's underlying technology and ability to execute, our ability to retain employees, and our ability to achieve synergies, such as increasing sales and achieving cost savings. Our failure to manage successfully and coordinate the growth of the combined acquired companies could have an adverse impact on our business and our future growth. The implementation of healthcare reform in the United States may adversely affect us. The Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act was enacted into law in the U.S. in March 2010. This legislation includes a provision that imposes a 23% excise tax on the sale of certain medical devices by a manufacturer, producer or importer of such devices in the United States starting after December 31, 2012 While we are waiting for further regulations to be established, we continue to evaluate the potential impact that this tax may have on our overall business. U.S. net sales represented approximately 48.4% of our worldwide sales in fiscal 2012 and, therefore, this tax burden may have a material impact on our results of operations. An interruption in our ability to manufacture our products or an inability to obtain key comp1nts or raw materials may adversely affect our business. Certain key products are manufactured at single locations, with limited alternate facilities. If an event occurs that results in damage to 1 or more of our facilities, we may be unable to manufacture the relevant products at previous levels or at all. In addition, for reasons of quality assurance or cost effectiveness, we purchase certain comp1nts and raw materials from sole suppliers. Due to the stringent regulations and requirements of the FDA and other similar non U.S. regulatory agencies regarding the manufacture of our products, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for certain comp1nts or materials. A reduction or interruption in manufacturing, or an inability to secure alternative sources of raw materials or comp1nts, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. We may incur significant debt in the future which could adversely affect our financial health and may result in restrictions on our operations. We may need to incur debt in the future, for example, to acquire complementary businesses. Our indebtedness would increase certain risks, including but not limited to the inability to satisfy our obligations with respect to our debt instruments, our inability to adjust to adverse economic conditions, our inability to fund future working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate requirements, and our inability to generate sufficient funds to cover required interest payments. The terms of our debt agreements may include covenants which could impose restrictions on our operations and limit 10 Table of Contents our ability to pursue our growth strategy. As a medical device manufacturer we are subject to a number of laws and regulations. Non compliance with those laws or regulations could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The manufacture, distribution and marketing of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other non United States regulatory bodies. We must obtain specific regulatory clearance prior to selling any new product or service, a process which is costly and time consuming. Our operations are also subject to continuous review and monitoring by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Failure to substantially comply with applicable regulations could subject our products to recall or seizure by government authorities, or an order to suspend manufacturing activities. As well, if our products were determined to have design or manufacturing flaws, this could result in their recall or seizure. Either of these situations could also result in the imposition of fines. As a majority of our revenue comes from outside the United States, we are subject to export and import restrictions, local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. Export of U.S. technology or goods manufactured in the United States to some jurisdictions requires special U.S. export authorization or local market controls that may be influenced by factors, including political dynamics, outside our control. Regulations relating to the use of certain materials in the manufacture of our products could also require us to convert our production to alternate material(s), which may be more costly or less effective. Many of our competitors have significantly greater financial and other resources. Their greater financial resources may allow them to more rapidly develop new technologies and more quickly address changes in customer requirements. Although no 1 company competes with us across our full line of products, we face competition in each of our product lines. Our ability to remain competitive depends on a combination of factors. Certain factors are within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety, cost effectiveness and continued rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control such as regulatory standards, medical standards, reimbursement policies and practices, and the practice of medicine. Loss of a significant customer could adversely affect our business. The Japanese Red Cross Society (JRC) is a significant customer that represented 137% of our revenues in fiscal 2012 . Additionally, a global healthcare customer ("Customer B") represented approximately 110% of our net revenues in fiscal 2012 Because of the size of these relationships we could experience a significant reduction in revenue if the JRC or Customer B decided to significantly reduce its purchases from us for any reason including a desire to rebalance its purchases between vendors, or if we are unable to obtain and maintain necessary regulatory approvals in Japan. We also have a concentration of credit risk due to our outstanding accounts receivable balances with the JRC and Customer B. Current or worsening economic conditions may adversely affect our business and financial condition. A portion of our trade accounts receivable outside the United States include sales to government owned or supported healthcare systems in several countries, which are subject to payment delays. Payment is dependent upon the financial stability and credi2rthiness of those countries national economies. We have not incurred significant losses on government receivables. We continually evaluate all government receivables for potential collection risks associated with the availability of government funding and reimbursement practices. If the financial condition of customers or the countries healthcare systems deteriorate such that their ability to make payments is uncertain, allowances may be required in future periods. Deteriorating credit and economic conditions in parts of Western Europe, particularly in Italy where our net accounts receivable is $210 million as of March 31, 2012, may increase the average length of time it takes us to collect our accounts receivable in certain regions within these countries. As a global corporation, we are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could adversely affect our cash flows and results of operations. International revenues and expenses account for a substantial portion of our operations and we intend to continue expanding our presence in international markets. In fiscal 2012 , our international revenues accounted for 516% of our total revenues. The exposure to fluctuations in currency exchange rates takes different forms. Reported revenues for sales, as well as manufacturing and operational costs, denominated in foreign currencies by our international businesses, when translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes, fluctuate due to exchange rate movement. Fluctuations in exchange rates could adversely affect our profitability in U.S. dollars of products and services sold by us into international markets, where payment for our products and services and related manufacturing and operational costs is made in local currencies. We are subject to the risks associated with communicable diseases. A significant outbreak of a disease could reduce the 11 Table of Contents demand for our products and affect our ability to provide our customers with products and services. An eligible donor willingness to donate is affected by concerns about their personal health and safety. Concerns about communicable diseases (such as pandemic flu, SARS, or HIV) could reduce the number of donors, and accordingly reduce the demand for our products for a period of time. A significant outbreak of a disease could also affect our employees ability to work, which could limit our ability to produce product and service our customers. There is a risk that the Company intellectual property may be subject to misappropriation in some countries. Certain countries, particularly China, do not enforce compliance with laws that protect intellectual property ( IP ) rights with the same degree of vigor as is available under the U.S. and European systems of justice. Further, certain of the Company IP rights are not registered in China, or if they were, have since expired. This may permit others to produce copies of products in China that are not covered by currently valid patent registrations. There is also a risk that such products may be exported from China to other countries. In order to aggressively protect our intellectual property throughout the world, we have a program of patent disclosures and filings in markets where we conduct significant business. While we believe this program is reasonable and adequate, the risk of loss is inherent in litigation as different legal systems offer different levels of protection to intellectual property, and it is still possible that even patented technologies may not be protected absolutely from infringement. Pending and future intellectual property litigation could be costly and disruptive to us. We operate in an industry that is susceptible to significant intellectual property litigation. We are currently pursuing intellectual property infringement claims described in more detail under Item 3 Legal Proceedings and Note 10 Commitments and Contingencies to our fiscal 2012 consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Intellectual property litigation is expensive, complex and lengthy and its outcome is difficult to predict. Patent litigation may result in adverse outcomes and could significantly divert the attention of our technical and management personnel. We sell our products in certain emerging economies. Emerging economies, such as Brazil, Russia, India and China, have less mature product regulatory systems, and can have more volatile financial markets. In addition, government controlled health care systems willingness or ability to invest in our products and systems may abruptly change due to changing government priorities or funding capacity. Our ability to sell products in these economies is dependent upon our ability to hire qualified employees or agents to represent our products locally, and our ability to obtain the necessary regulatory approvals in a less mature regulatory environment. If we are unable to retain qualified representatives or maintain the necessary regulatory approvals, we will not be able to continue to sell products in these markets. We are exposed to a higher degree of financial risk, if we extend credit to customers in these economies. In many of the international markets in which we do business, including certain parts of Europe, South America, the Middle East, Russia and Asia, our employees, agents or distributors offer to sell our products in response to public tenders issued by various governmental agencies. There is additional risk in selling our products through agents or distributors, particularly in public tenders. If they misrepresent our products, do not provide appropriate service and delivery, or commit a violation of local or U.S. law, our reputation could be harmed, and we could be subject to fines, sanctions or both. We have a complex international supply chain. Any disruption to 1 or more of our suppliers production or delivery of sufficient volumes of subcomp1nts conforming to our specifications could disrupt or delay our ability to deliver finished products to our customers. For example, we purchase comp1nts in Asia for use in manufacturing in the United States and Scotland. We also regularly ship finished goods from Scotland to Europe and Asia. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposables, which are the main source of our revenues. Increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Increases in the costs of other commodities may affect our procurement costs to a lesser degree. The technologies that cover our products are the subject of active patent prosecution. There is a risk that 1 or more of our products may be determined to infringe a patent held by another party. If this were to occur we may be subject to an injunction or to payment of royalties, or both, which may adversely affect our ability to market the affected product(s). In addition, competitors may patent technological advances which may give them a competitive advantage or create barriers to entry. 12 Table of Contents Our products are made with materials which are subject to regulation by governmental agencies. Environmental regulations may prohibit the use of certain compounds in products we market and sell into regulated markets. If we are unable to substitute suitable materials into our processes, our manufacturing operations may be disrupted. In addition, we may be obligated to disclose the origin of certain materials used in our products, including but not limited to metals mined from locations which have been the site of human rights violations. We are entrusted with sensitive personal information relating to surgical patients, blood donors, employees and other persons in the course of operating our business and serving our customers. Government agencies require that we implement measures to ensure the integrity and security of such personal data and, in the event of a breach of protocol, that we inform affected individuals. If our systems were not properly designed or implemented, or should suffer a breach of security or an intrusion (e.g., hacking ) by unauthorized persons, the Company reputation could be harmed, and it could incur costs and liabilities to affected persons and enforcement agencies. We operate in an industry susceptible to significant product liability claims. Our products are relied upon by medical personnel in connection with the treatment of patients and the collection of blood from donors. In the event that patients or donors sustain injury or death in connection with their condition or treatment, we, along with others, may be sued, and whether or not we are ultimately determined to be liable, we may incur significant legal expenses. These claims may be brought by individuals seeking relief on their own behalf or purporting to represent a class. In addition, product liability claims may be asserted against us in the future based on events we are not aware of at the present time. In addition, such litigation could damage our reputation and, therefore, impair our ability to market our products or to obtain professional or product liability insurance or cause the premiums for such insurances to increase. We carry product liability coverage. While we believe that the aggregate current coverage is sufficient, there can be no assurance that such coverage will be adequate to cover liabilities which may be incurred. Moreover, we may in the future be unable to obtain product and professional liability coverage in amounts and on terms that we find acceptable, if at all. Consolidation in the healthcare industry could lead to increased demands for price concessions or the exclusion of some suppliers from certain of our significant market segments, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The costs of healthcare has risen significantly over the past decade and numerous initiatives and reforms by legislators, regulators and third party payors to curb these costs have resulted in a consolidation trend in the healthcare industry, including plasma fractionation companies and hospitals. This consolidation has resulted in greater pricing pressures, decreased average selling prices, and the exclusion of certain suppliers from important market segments as group purchasing organizations, integrated delivery ne2rks and large single accounts continue to consolidate purchasing decisions for some of our hospital customers. We expect that market demand, government regulation, third party reimbursement policies, government contracting requirements, and societal pressures will continue to change the worldwide healthcare industry, resulting in further business consolidations and alliances among our customers and competitors, which may exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products and adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. 13 Table of Contents ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
