CIK: 313143
Company Name: HAEMONETICS CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2017-05-24
Accession Number: 0000313143-17-000017


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Company Overview Haem1tics is a global healthcare company dedicated to providing a suite of innovative hematology products and solutions to customers to help them improve patient care and reduce the cost of healthcare. Our technology addresses important medical markets, including blood and plasma comp1nt collection, the surgical suite, and hospital transfusion services. When used in this report, the terms we, us, our and the Company mean Haem1tics. Haem1tics was founded in 1971 as a medical device company and is a pi1er and market leader in developing and manufacturing automated blood comp1nt collection devices and surgical blood salvage devices. Blood and its comp1nts (plasma, platelets, and red cells) have many vital and frequently life saving clinical applications. Plasma is used for patients with major blood loss and is manufactured into biopharmaceuticals to treat a variety of illnesses, including immune diseases and coagulation disorders. Red cells treat trauma patients or patients undergoing surgery with high blood loss, such as open heart surgery or organ transplant. Platelets have many uses in patient care, including supporting cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. Blood is essential to a modern healthcare system. Haem1tics develops and markets a wide range of devices and solutions to serve our customers. We provide plasma collection systems and software which enable plasma fractionators to make life saving pharmaceuticals. We provide analytical devices for measuring hemostasis which enable healthcare providers to better manage their patients bleeding risk. Haem1tics makes blood processing systems and software which make blood donation more efficient and track life giving blood comp1nts. Finally, Haem1tics supplies systems and software which facilitate blood transfusions and cell processing. Market and Products Product Lines In fiscal 2017, we organized our products into four categories for purposes of evaluating and developing their growth potential Plasma, Hemostasis Management, Blood Center and Cell Processing. For that purpose, Plasma included plasma collection devices and disposables, plasma donor management software, and anticoagulant and saline sold to plasma customers. Hemostasis Management included devices and methodologies for measuring coagulation characteristics of blood, such as our TEG Hemostasis Analyzer. Blood Center included blood collection and processing devices and disposables for red cells, platelets and whole blood as well as related donor management software. Cell Processing included surgical blood salvage systems, specialized blood cell processing systems, disposables and blood transfusion management software. We believe that Plasma and Hemostasis Management have the greatest growth potential, while Cell Processing innovation offers an opportunity to increase market share and expand into new segments. Blood Center competes in challenging markets which require us to manage the business differently, including reducing costs, shrinking the scope of the current product line, and evaluating opportunities to exit unfavorable customer contracts. We are progressing toward a streamlined operating model with a management and cost structure that can bring about sustainable productivity improvement across the organization. Overall implementation of our new model began in fiscal 2017 and will continue into fiscal 2018 and 2019. Plasma The Plasma Collection Market for Fractionation Human plasma is collected and processed by biopharmaceutical companies into therapeutic and diagnostic products that aid in the treatment of immune diseases and coagulation disorders. While plasma is also used to aid patients with extreme blood loss, such as trauma victims, biopharmaceutical companies solely focus on the pharmaceutical uses of plasma. Many biopharmaceutical companies are vertically integrated and are now collecting and fractionating the plasma required to manufacture pharmaceuticals. The vertical integration of these customers paved the way for highly efficient plasma supply chain management and leveraging information technology to manage operations from the point of plasma donation to fractionation to the production of the final product. Haem1tics' Plasma Products Built around our automated plasma collection devices and related disposables, our portfolio of products and services is designed to support multiple facets of plasma collector operations. We have a long standing commitment to understanding our customers' collection and manufacturing processes. As a result, we aim to design equipment that is durable, dependable, and easy to use, and provide comprehensive training and support to our plasma collection customers. 1 Table of Contents Today, the vast majority of plasma collections worldwide are performed using automated collection technology because it is safer and more cost effective. With our PCS (Plasma Collection System) brand automated plasma collection technology, more plasma can be collected during any 1 donation event because the other blood comp1nts are returned to the donor through the sterile disposable sets used for the plasma donation procedure. We offer multiple products necessary for plasma collection and storage, including PCS brand plasma collection equipment and disposables, plasma collection containers and intravenous solutions. We also offer a portfolio of integrated information technology platforms for plasma customers to manage their donors, operations, and supply chain. Our software products automate the donor interview and qualification process, streamline the workflow process in the plasma center, provide the controls necessary to evaluate donor suitability, determine the ability to release units collected, and manage unit distribution. With our software solutions, plasma collectors can manage processes across the plasma supply chain, react quickly to business changes, and implement opportunities to reduce costs. In April, 2017, we submitted a new plasmapheresis device, the PCS 300, for 510(k) regulatory clearance with the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") and continue to work on future enhancements to this important product, some of which may require additional clearances. Our Plasma business unit represented 46.4% , 420% , and 38.8% of our total revenue in fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Hospital Hemostasis Management The Hemostasis Management Market Hemostasis refers to a patient's ability to form and maintain blood clots. Hemostasis Management plays a role in various medical procedures including liver transplant, cardiovascular procedures, trauma and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). By understanding a patient clotting ability, clinicians can better plan for the patient care, deciding in advance whether to start or discontinue use of certain drugs or determine the likelihood of the patient's need for a transfusion and which blood comp1nts will be most effective in minimizing blood loss and reducing clotting risk. Such planning supports better care, which can lead to lower hospital costs through a reduction in unnecessary donor blood transfusions, reduced adverse transfusion reactions, and shorter intensive care unit and hospital stays. Haem1tics Hemostasis Management Products We have 2 device platforms which we market to hospitals and laboratories as an alternative to less comprehensive blood tests the TEG 5000 analyzer, which we acquired in the 2007 acquisition of Haemoscope Corporation, and the TEG 6s device, which we license from Cora Healthcare, Inc., a company established by Haemoscope's founders. Under the license from Cora Healthcare, we have exclusive rights to manufacture and commercialize TEG 6s in hospitals and hospital laboratory fields. Both of our TEG systems are blood diagnostic instruments that measure a patient's hemostasis. This information enables caregivers to decide the best blood related clinical treatment for the patient in order to minimize blood loss and reduce clotting risk. The TEG 5000 analyzer is approved for a broad set of indications in all of our markets. The TEG 6s and TEG Manager are approved for the same set of indications as the TEG 5000 in Europe, Australia and Japan. In the U.S., TEG 6s is approved for limited indications, including cardiovascular surgery and cardiology. We are pursuing a broader set of indications for the TEG 6s in the U.S., including trauma. Our Hemostasis Management business unit represented 7.5% , 6.5% , and 5.6% of our total revenue in fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Cell Processing The Cell Processing Market Loss of blood is common in many surgical procedures, including open heart, trauma, transplant, vascular, and orthopedic procedures, and the need for transfusion of oxygen carrying red cells to make up for lost blood volume is routine. Patients commonly receive donor blood which carries various risks, including transfusion with the wrong blood type, transfusion of a blood borne disease or infectious agent, transfusion reactions including death, but more commonly chills, fevers or other side effects that can prolong a patient recovery. An alternative to allogeneic blood is surgical cell salvage, also known as autotransfusion, which reduces or eliminates a patient need for blood donated from others and ensures that the patient receives the freshest and safest blood possible his or her own. Surgical cell salvage involves the collection of a patient own blood during or after surgery for reinfusion of red cells to that patient. Blood is sucti1d from the surgical site or collected from a wound or chest drain, processed and washed through a centrifuge based system that yields concentrated red cells available for transfusion back to the patient. This process occurs in a sterile, closed circuit, single use consumable set that is fitted 2 Table of Contents into an electromechanical device. We market our surgical blood salvage products to surgical specialists, primarily cardiovascular, orthopedic, and trauma surgeons, and to surgical suite service providers. In recent years, more efficient blood use and less invasive cardiovascular surgeries have reduced demand for autotransfusion in these procedures and contributed to intense competition in mature markets, while increased access to healthcare in emerging economies has provided new markets and sources of growth. Orthopedic procedures have seen similar to the changes with improved blood management practices, including the use of tranexamic acid to treat and prevent post operative bleeding, have significantly reduced the number of transfusions and autotransfusion. Haem1tics Cell Processing Products Haem1tics offers a range of solutions that improve a hospital's systems for acquiring blood, storing it in the hospital, and dispensing it efficiently and correctly. Over the last few years, hospitals have become increasingly focused on of their need to control costs and improve patient safety by managing blood more effectively. Our products and integrated solution platforms help hospitals optimize performance of blood acquisition, storage, and distribution. The Cell Saver system is a surgical blood salvage system targeted to procedures that involve mid to high volume blood loss, such as cardiovascular or orthopedic surgeries. It has become the standard of care for these surgeries. The Cell Saver Elite system is our most advanced autotransfusion option to minimize allogeneic blood use for surgeries with medium to high blood loss. The OrthoPAT surgical blood salvage system is targeted to orthopedic procedures, such as hip and knee replacements, which involve slower, lower volume blood loss that often occurs well after surgery. The system is designed to remain with the patient following surgery, to recover blood and produce a washed red cell product for autotransfusion. Our Cell Processing software products help hospitals track and safely deliver stored blood products. SafeTrace Tx is our software solution that helps manage blood product inventory, perform patient cross matching, and manage transfusions. In addition, our BloodTrack suite of solutions manages tracking and control of blood products from the hospital blood center through transfusion to the patient. Our Cell Processing business unit represented 119% , 124% , and 132% of our total revenue in fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Blood Center The Blood Center Market There are millions of blood donations throughout the world every year that produce blood products for transfusion to surgical, trauma, or chronically ill patients. Patients typically receive only the blood comp1nts necessary to treat a particular clinical condition. Platelet therapy is frequently used to alleviate the effects of chemotherapy and help patients with bleeding disorders and to stop bleeding. Red cells are often transfused to patients to replace blood lost during surgery. Red cells are also transfused to patients with blood disorders, such as sickle cell anemia or aplastic anemia. Plasma, in addition to its role in creating life saving pharmaceuticals, is frequently transfused to replace blood volume in trauma victims and surgical patients. The demand for blood comp1nts varies across the world. While overall we expect total demand to remain stable, demand in individual markets can vary greatly. Highly populated emerging market countries are seeing demand growth as they expand healthcare coverage. As greater numbers of people gain access to more advanced medical treatment, demand for blood comp1nts, plasma derived drugs, and surgical procedures increases. In more mature markets, the development of less invasive procedures with lower associated blood loss and better blood management have offset the demand increases from aging populations. Most donations worldwide are manual whole blood donations. In this process, whole blood is collected from the donor and then transported to a laboratory where it is separated into its comp1nts red cells, platelets and or plasma. In addition to manual collections, there is a significant market for automated comp1nt blood collections. In this procedure, the blood separation process is automated and occurs in real time while a person is donating blood. In this separation method, only the specific blood comp1nt targeted is collected, and the remaining comp1nts are returned to the blood donor. Automated blood comp1nt collection allows significantly more of the targeted blood comp1nt to be collected during a donation event. Haem1tics Blood Center Products Today, Haem1tics offers automated blood comp1nt and manual whole blood collection systems to blood collection centers to collect blood products efficiently and cost effectively. 3 Table of Contents We market the MCS (Multicomp1nt Collection System) brand apheresis equipment which is designed to collect specific blood comp1nts integrated from the donor. Utilizing the MCS automated platelet collection protocols, blood centers collect 1 or more therapeutic doses of platelets during a single donation. The MCS 2 unit protocol or double red cell collection device helps blood collectors optimize the collection of red cells by automating the blood separation function, eliminating the need for laboratory processing, and enabling the collection of 2 units of red cells from a single donor thus maximizing the amount of red cells collected per eligible donor and helping to mitigate red cell shortages in countries where this problem exists. Blood collectors can also use the MCS system to collect 1 unit of red cells and a "jumbo" (double) unit of plasma, or 1 unit of red cells and 1 unit of platelets from a single donor. The MCS plasma protocol, which provides the possibility of collecting 600 800ml of plasma for either transfusion to patients or for use by the pharmaceutical industry, completes the comprehensive portfolio of different blood comp1nt collection options on this device. Haem1tics also offers a portfolio of products for manual whole blood collection and processing. Haem1tics' portfolio of disposable whole blood collection and comp1nt storage sets offer flexibility in collecting a unit of whole blood and the subsequent production and storage of the red blood cell, platelet or plasma products, including options for in line or dockable filters for leukoreduction of any blood comp1nt. With the ACP (Automated Cell Processor) brand, Haem1tics offers a solution to automate the washing and freezing of red cell comp1nts. The automated red cell washing procedure removes plasma proteins within the red cell units to provide a safer product for transfusion to frequently transfused patients, neonates, or patients with a history of transfusion reactions. The automated glycerolization and deglycerolization steps are required to prepare red cells for frozen storage. Freezing the red cell units can expand the shelf life of these products up to 10 years. Customers utilize this technology to implement strategic red cell inventories for large scale catastrophes, storage of rare blood types, or enhanced inventory management. Blood Center software solutions help blood center collectors improve efficiencies of blood collection and supply and help ensure donor safety. This includes solutions for blood drive planning, donor recruitment and retention, blood collection, comp1nt manufacturing and distribution. Our products SafeTrace and El Dorado Donor donation and blood unit management systems span blood center operations and automate and track operations from the recruitment of the blood donor to the disposition of the blood product. Our Hemasphere software solution provides support for more efficient blood drive planning, and Donor Doc and e Donor software help to improve recruitment and retention. Our Blood Center business unit represented 34.3% , 39.1% , and 424% of our total revenue in fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Although we address our customers' needs through multiple product lines, we manage our business as five operating segments based primarily on geography (a) North America Plasma, (b) Americas Blood Center and Hospital, (c) Europe, Middle East and Africa (collectively "EMEA"), (d) Asia Pacific and (e) Japan. The North America Plasma reporting unit is a separate operating segment with dedicated segment management due the size and scale of the Plasma business unit. For financial reporting purposes, we aggregate our five operating segments into four reportable segments which include Japan EMEA North America Plasma All Other 4 Table of Contents We have aggregated the Americas Blood Center and Hospital and Asia Pacific operating segments into the All Other reportable segment based upon their similar operational and economic characteristics, including similarity of operating margin. Segment Assets Our assets by segment are set forth below (In thousands) April 1, 2017 April 2, 2016 March 28, 2015 Japan $ 91,346 $ 129,551 $ 146,765 EMEA 259,863 249,504 305,540 North America Plasma 313,934 453,212 467,249 All Other 573,566 486,861 565,863 Total assets $ 1,238,709 $ 1,319,128 $ 1,485,417 The financial information required for segments is included herein in Note 14, Segment Information, to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Marketing Sales Distribution We market and sell our products to biopharmaceutical companies, blood collection groups and independent blood centers, hospitals and hospital service providers, group purchasing organizations and national health organizations through our own direct sales force (including full time sales representatives and clinical specialists) as well as independent distributors. Sales representatives target the primary decision makers within each of those organizations. United States In fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , 59.0% , 57.2% , and 54.4% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated in the U.S., where we primarily use a direct sales force to sell our products. See Note 14, Segment Information , to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for additional information. Outside the United States In fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , 410% , 428% , and 45.6% , respectively, of consolidated net revenues were generated through sales to non U.S. customers. Outside the United States, we use a combination of direct sales force and distributors. See Note 14, Segment Information , to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for additional information. Research and Development Our research and development centers in the United States and Switzerland ensure that protocol variations are incorporated to closely match local customer requirements. In addition, Haem1tics maintains software development operations in Canada and France. Customer collaborations are also an important part of our technical strength and competitive advantage. These collaborations with customers and transfusion experts provide us with ideas for new products and applications, enhanced protocols, and potential test sites as well as objective evaluations and expert opinions regarding technical and performance issues. The development of blood comp1nt separation products, hemostasis analyzers, and software has required us to maintain technical expertise in various engineering disciplines, including mechanical, electrical, software, and biomedical engineering and material science. Innovations resulting from these various engineering efforts enable us to develop systems that are faster, smaller, and more user friendly, or that incorporate additional features important to our customer base. In fiscal 2017 , research and development resources were primarily allocated to supporting next generation plasma collection and software systems. We will continue to invest resources in clinical programs for our Hemostasis Management business unit, most notably a global registry study for our TEG platform. Manufacturing Our principal manufacturing operations are located in the United States, Mexico, and Malaysia. In general, our production activities occur in controlled settings or clean room environments. Each step of the manufacturing and assembly process is quality checked, qualified, and validated. Critical process steps and materials are documented to ensure that every unit is produced consistently and meets performance requirements. Our equipment and disposable manufacturing 5 Table of Contents sites are certified to the ISO 13485 standard and to the Medical Device Directive allowing placement of the CE mark of conformity. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposable products. Contracts with our suppliers help mitigate some of the short term effects of price volatility in this market. However, increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Contractors manufacture some comp1nt sets, equipment, and liquid solutions according to our specifications. We maintain important relationships with 2 Japanese manufacturers that produce finished disposables in Singapore, Japan, and Thailand. We have also engaged Sanmina Corporation to be the sole manufacturer of certain equipment. Certain parts and comp1nts are purchased from sole source vendors. We believe that, if necessary, alternative sources of supply are available in most cases, and could be secured within a relatively short period of time. Nevertheless, an interruption in supply could temporarily interfere with production schedules and affect our operations. Our equipment is designed in house and assembled by us or our contracted manufacturers from comp1nts that are manufactured to our specifications. The completed instruments are programmed, calibrated, and tested to ensure compliance with our engineering and quality assurance specifications. Inspection checks are conducted throughout the manufacturing process to verify proper assembly and functionality. When mechanical and electronic comp1nts are sourced from outside vendors, those vendors must meet detailed qualification and process control requirements. Intellectual Property We consider our intellectual property rights to be important to our business. We rely on patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws, as well as provisions in our agreements with third parties, to protect our intellectual property rights. We hold patents in the United States and many international jurisdictions on some of our machines, processes, disposables and related technologies. These patents cover certain elements of our systems, including protocols employed in our equipment and certain aspects of our processing chambers and disposables. Our patents may cover current products, products in markets we plan to enter, or products in markets we plan to license, or the patents may be defensive in that they are directed to technologies not currently embodied in our current products. We may also license patent rights from third parties that cover technologies that we plan to use in our business. To maintain our competitive position, we rely on the technical expertise and know how of our personnel and on our patent rights. We pursue an active and formal program of invention disclosure and patent application in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. We own various trademarks that have been registered in the United States and certain other countries. Our policy is to obtain patent and trademark rights in the U.S. and foreign countries where such rights are available and we believe it is commercially advantageous to do so. However, the standards for international protection of intellectual property vary widely. We cannot assure that pending patent and trademark applications will result in issued patents and registered trademarks, that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged or circumvented by competitors, or that our patents will not be determined invalid. Competition To remain competitive, we must continue to develop and acquire new cost effective products, information technology platforms, and business services. We believe that our ability to maintain a competitive advantage will continue to depend on a combination of factors. Some factors are largely within our control such as (i) maintenance of a positive reputation among our customers, (ii) development of new products which meet our customer's needs, (iii) obtaining regulatory approvals for our products in key markets, (iv) obtaining patents which protect our innovations, (v) development and protection of proprietary know how in important technological areas, (vi) product quality, safety and cost effectiveness and (vii) continual and rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control. We could see changes in regulatory standards or clinical practice which favor a competitor's technology or reduce revenues in key areas of our business. In addition, we face competition from several large, global companies with product offerings similar to ours, such as Terumo BCT, LivaNova Plc and Fresenius SE & Co. KGaA. Terumo and Fresenius, in particular, have significantly greater financial and other resources than we do and are strong competitors in a number of our businesses. The following provides an overview of the key competitors in each of our four global product enterprises. Plasma In the automated plasma collection market, we principally compete with the Fresenius' Fenwal product line, on the basis of quality, reliability, ease of use, services and technical features of the collection systems, and on the long term cost effectiveness of equipment and disposables. In China, the market is populated by local producers of a product that is intended to be similar to ours. Recently, those competitors have expanded to markets beyond China, including 6 Table of Contents European and South American countries. In the field of plasma related software, MAK Systems is the primary commercial competitor along with applications developed internally by our customers. Hospital Hemostasis Management The TEG Thrombelastograph Hemostasis Analyzer is used primarily in surgical applications. Our principal competitor in Europe and the United States is ROTEM analyzers. ROTEM was recently acquired by a subsidiary of Werfen, Instrumentation Laboratories, which is a United States based laboratory instrument manufacturer. Instrumentation Laboratories has also recently acquired Accriva Diagnostics, the owner of Hemochron and Verifynow hemostasis management products. Other competitive technologies include standard coagulation tests and platelet function testing. There are also additional technologies being explored to assess viscoelastic and other characteristics that can provide insights into the coagulation status of a patient. The TEG analyzer competes with other laboratory tests based on its ability to provide a more complete picture of a patient's hemostasis at a single point in time and the ability to measure the clinically relevant platelet function for an individual patient. Cell Processing In the intraoperative surgical blood salvage market, competition is based on reliability, ease of use, service, support, and price. For high volume platforms, each manufacturer's technology is similar, and our Cell Saver technology competes principally with products offered by LivaNova Plc, Medtronic, and Fresenius. In the perioperative surgical blood salvage market, our OrthoPAT system competes primarily against (i) non automated processing systems whose end product is an unwashed red blood cell unit for transfusion to the patient, (ii) transfusions of donated blood and (iii) coagulation therapies, principally tranexamic acid. The competition for processing cells for frozen storage is based on the level of automation, labor intensiveness and system type (open versus closed). Open systems may be weaker in good manufacturing process compliance. Moreover, blood processed after freezing through open systems has a 24 hour shelf life. BloodTrack's primary competition are manual cross matching and delivery systems. However, both Mediware in the United States and MSoft, based in England, have competitive software offerings. Blood Center We have several competitors in the Blood Center product lines, some of which compete across all blood comp1nts and others that are more specialized. Terumo and Fresenius are our major competitors in platelet collection. In platelet collections, there are 2 areas of competition automated collection and pooled random donor. In the automated collection area, competition is based on continual performance improvement, as measured by the time and efficiency of platelet collection and the quality of the platelets collected. Each of these companies has taken a different technological approach from ours in designing their systems for automated platelet collection. A key point of competition is speed, particularly in collecting 2 units of platelets from a single donor. While not all donors are eligible to donate 2 units, we have seen our competitors gain an advantage in markets with a significant number of eligible donors. Terumo, in particular, has an advantage in the collection of 2 units of platelets from a single donor. In addition to automated platelet collection offerings, we now also compete in the pooled random donor platelet segment from whole blood collections from which pooled platelets are derived with the Acrodose product or buffy coat pooling sets. Terumo and Fresenius are also competitors in the automated red cell collection market. However, it is important to note that most double red cell collection is d1 in the U.S. and less than 10% of the red cells collected in the U.S. annually are collected via automation. Therefore, we also compete with the traditional method of collecting red cells from the manual collection of whole blood. We compete on the basis of total cost, type specific collection, process control, product quality, and inventory management. We face intense competition in our whole blood business on the basis of quality and price. In North America, Europe and Asia Pacific our main competitors are Fresenius, MacoPharma and Terumo. We do not have significant whole blood revenues in Japan today. With the ACP (Automated Cell Processor) brand, Haem1tics offers a closed system cell processor which gives blood processed through it a 14 day shelf life after being removed from frozen storage. We compete with Terumo's open systems in this market. In Blood Center software, MAK Technologies is a competitor along with systems developed internally by our customers. 7 Table of Contents Our technical staff is highly skilled, but certain competitors have substantially greater financial resources and larger technical staffing at their disposal. There can be no assurance that competitors will not direct substantial efforts and resources toward the development and marketing of products competitive with those of Haem1tics. Significant Customers In fiscal 2017 , 2016 and 2015, our ten largest customers accounted for approximately 42% , 36% and 48% of our net revenues, respectively. In fiscal 2017 and 2016, 1 plasma collection customer accounted for approximately 14% and 11% of our net revenues, respectively. There were no significant customers that accounted for greater than 10% of our net revenues in fiscal 2015 . Government Regulation Medical Device Regulation The products we manufacture and market are subject to regulation by the Center of Biologics Evaluation and Research ( CBER ), Center for Devices and Radiological Health ( CDRH ) and the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research ("CDER") of the FDA, and other non United States regulatory bodies. All medical devices introduced to the United States market since 1976 are required by the FDA, as a condition of marketing, to secure either a 510(k) pre market notification clearance or an approved premarket approval application ( PMA ). In the United States, software used to automate blood center operations and blood collections and to track those comp1nts through the system are considered by the FDA to be medical devices, subject to 510(k) pre market notification. Intravenous solutions (blood anticoagulants, solutions for storage of red blood cells, and saline) marketed by us for use with our manual collection and automated systems requires us to obtain an approved New Drug Application ( NDA ) or Abbreviated New Drug Application ( ANDA ) from CBER or CDER. A 510(k) pre market clearance indicates the FDA agreement with an applicant determination that the product for which clearance is sought is substantially equivalent to another legally marketed medical device. The process of obtaining a 510(k) clearance may involve the submission of clinical data and supporting information. The process of obtaining an NDA approval for solutions is likely to take much longer than 510(k) clearances because the FDA review process is more complicated. The FDA Quality System regulations set forth standards for our product design and manufacturing processes, requires the maintenance of certain records and provides for inspections of our facilities. There are also certain requirements of state, local and foreign governments that must be complied with in the manufacturing and marketing of our products. We maintain customer complaint files, record all lot numbers of disposable products, and conduct periodic audits to assure compliance with applicable regulations. We place special emphasis on customer training and advise all customers that device operation should be undertaken only by qualified personnel. The FDA can ban certain medical devices, detain or seize adulterated or misbranded medical devices, order repair, replacement or refund of these devices, and require notification of health professionals and others with regard to medical devices that present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also enjoin and restrain certain violations of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act pertaining to medical devices, or initiate action for criminal prosecution of such violations. We are also subject to regulation in the countries outside the United States in which we market our products. The member states of the European Union (EU) have adopted the European Medical Device Directive, which creates a single set of medical device regulations for all EU member countries. These regulations require companies that wish to manufacture and distribute medical devices in EU member countries to obtain CE Marking for their products. Outside of the EU, many of the regulations applicable to our products are similar to those of the FDA. However, the national health or social security organizations of certain countries require our products to be registered by those countries before they can be marketed in those countries. We have complied with these regulations and have obtained such registrations where we market our products. Federal, state and foreign regulations regarding the manufacture and sale of products such as ours are subject to change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, such changes might have on our business. 8 Table of Contents Conflict Minerals The Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act imposes disclosure requirements regarding the use of "Conflict Minerals" mined from the Democratic Republic of Congo and adjoining countries in products, whether or not these products are manufactured by third parties. The conflict minerals include tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold, and their derivatives. These requirements could affect the pricing, sourcing and availability of minerals used in the manufacture of our products. There will be additional costs associated with complying with the disclosure requirements, such as costs related to determining the source of any conflict minerals used in our products. Our supply chain is complex and we may be unable to verify the origins for all metals used in our products. Other Regulation We are also subject to various environmental, health and general safety laws, directives and regulations both in the U.S. and outside the U.S. Our operations, like those of other medical device companies, involve the use of substances regulated under environmental laws, primarily in manufacturing and sterilization processes. We believe that sound environmental, health and safety performance contributes to our competitive strength while benefiting our customers, shareholders and employees. Environmental Matters Failure to comply with international, federal and local environmental protection laws or regulations could have an adverse impact on our business or could require material capital expenditures. We continue to monitor changes in U.S. and international environmental regulations that may present a significant risk to the business, including laws or regulations relating to the manufacture or sale of products using plastics. Employees As of April 1, 2017 , we employed the full time equivalent of 3,107 persons. Availability of Reports and Other Information All of our corporate governance materials, including the Principles of Corporate Governance, Code of Conduct and the charters of the Audit, Compensation, and Governance and Compliance Committees are published on the Investor Relations section of our website at http phx.corporate ir.net phoenix.zhtml?c=72118&p=irol IRHome . On this web site the public can also access, free of charge, our annual, quarterly and current reports and other documents filed or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Information Statements contained in this report, as well as oral statements we make which are prefaced with the words may, will, expect, anticipate, continue, estimate, project, intend, designed, and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect our future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. These statements are based on our current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which we can give no firm assurance. Further, any forward looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. As it is not possible to predict every new factor that may emerge, forward looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of our actual future financial condition or results. These forward looking statements, like any forward looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated, including demand for whole blood and blood comp1nts, changes in executive management, changes in operations, restructuring and turnaround plans, asset revaluations to reflect current business conditions, asset sales, technological advances in the medical field and standards for transfusion medicine and our ability to successfully offer products that incorporate such advances and standards, product quality, market acceptance, regulatory uncertainties, including in the receipt or timing of regulatory approvals, the effect of economic and political conditions, the impact of competitive products and pricing, blood product reimbursement policies and practices, foreign currency exchange rates, changes in customers ordering patterns including single source tenders, the effect of industry consolidation as seen in the plasma and blood center markets, the effect of communicable diseases and the effect of uncertainties in markets outside the U.S. (including Europe and Asia) in which we operate and other risks detailed under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. The foregoing list should not be construed as exhaustive. 9 Table of Contents ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K and the exhibits hereto, the following risk factors should be considered carefully in evaluating our business. Our business, financial condition, cash flows or results of operations could be materially adversely affected by any of these risks. This section contains forward looking statements. You should refer to the explanation of the qualifications and limitations on forward looking statements at the end of Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. We recently completed a global strategic review of our business. If our new strategic direction does not yield the expected results or we fail to implement the necessary changes to our operations, we could see material adverse effects on our business, financial condition or results of operations. In fiscal 2017, we organized our products into four categories for purposes of evaluating and developing their growth potential Plasma, Hemostasis Management, Blood Center and Cell Processing. We believe that Plasma and Hemostasis Management have the greatest growth potential, while Cell Processing innovation offers an opportunity to increase market share and expand into new segments. We believe Blood Center competes in challenging markets which require us to manage the business differently, including reducing costs, shrinking the scope of the current product line, and evaluating opportunities to exit unfavorable customer contracts. If we have not correctly identified the product categories with greatest growth potential, we will not allocate our resources appropriately which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Further, if we are unable to reduce costs and complexity in our Blood Center business unit, we will obtain lower than expected cash flows to fund our future growth and capital needs. This could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and results of operations. If we are unable to successfully expand our product lines through internal research and development and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. The risks of missteps and set backs are an inherent part of the innovation and development processes in the medical device industry. Continued growth of our business depends on our maintaining a pipeline of profitable new products and successful improvements to our existing products. This requires accurate market analysis and carefully targeted application of intellectual and financial resources toward the development or acquisition of new products. The creation and adoption of technological advances is only 1 step. We must also efficiently develop the technology into a product which confers a competitive advantage, represents a cost effective solution or provides improved patient care. Finally, as a part of the regulatory process of obtaining marketing clearance for new products, we conduct and participate in numerous clinical trials, the results of which may be unfavorable, or perceived as unfavorable by the market, and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Loss of a significant customer could adversely affect our business. In fiscal 2017 , 1 plasma collection customer accounted for approximately 14% of our net revenues and our ten largest customers accounted for approximately 42% of our net revenues. If any of our largest customers materially reduce their purchases from us or terminate their relationship with us for any reason, we could experience an adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. Our four largest Plasma customers have contracts in place which will expire before the end of fiscal 2019. As a result, we will need to amend current contracts or enter into new contracts for the PCS 300. A failure to enter into new contracts with these customers on acceptable terms, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our inability to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, any necessary U.S. or foreign regulatory clearances or approvals for our newly developed products or product enhancements could harm our business and prospects. Our products are subject to a high level of regulatory oversight. Our inability to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, any necessary U.S. or foreign regulatory clearances or approvals for newly developed products or product enhancements could harm our business and prospects. The process of obtaining clearances and approvals can be costly and time consuming. In addition, there is a risk that any approvals or clearances, once obtained, may be withdrawn or modified. Most medical devices cannot be marketed in the U.S. without 510(k) clearance or premarket approval by the FDA. We have recently submitted a new plasmapheresis device, the PCS 300, for 510(k) regulatory clearance with the FDA and continue to work on future enhancements to this important product, some of which may require additional regulatory clearances. 10 Table of Contents Delays in receipt of, or failure to obtain, necessary clearances or approvals for our new products could delay or preclude realization of product revenues from new products or result in substantial additional costs which could decrease our profitability. If we are unable to successfully grow our business through business relationships and acquisitions, our business may be materially and adversely affected. Promising partnerships and acquisitions may not be completed for reasons such as competition among prospective partners or buyers, our inability to reach satisfactory terms, or the need for regulatory approvals. Any acquisition that we complete may be dilutive to earnings and require the investment of significant resources. The economic environment may constrain our ability to access the capital needed for acquisitions and other capital investments. A significant portion of our revenue derives from the sale of blood collection supplies. Declines in the number of blood collection procedures have adversely impacted our business and future declines may have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The demand for whole blood disposable products in the U.S. continued to decrease in fiscal 2017 and 2016 due to a sustained decline in transfusion rates and actions taken by hospitals to improve blood management techniques and protocols. In response to this trend, U.S. blood center collection groups prefer single source vendors for their whole blood collection products and are primarily focused on obtaining the lowest average selling prices. While we began to see a moderation in the rate of market decline during fiscal 2017, we expect to see continued declines in transfusion rates and the market to remain price focused and highly competitive for the foreseeable future. Continued declines in this market could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and results of operations. Consolidation of the healthcare providers and blood collectors has increased demand for price concessions and caused the exclusion of suppliers from significant market segments, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Political, economic and policy influences are causing the healthcare and blood collection industries to make substantial structural and financial changes that affect our results of operations. Government and private sector initiatives limiting the growth of healthcare costs and causing structural reforms in healthcare delivery, including the reduction in blood use and reduced payments for care. These trends have placed greater pricing pressure on suppliers, decreased average selling prices and increased the number of sole source relationships. This pressure impacts our Hemostasis Management, Cell Processing and Blood Center businesses. The expansion of group purchasing organizations in the United States, integrated delivery ne2rks and large single accounts puts direct price pressure on our Hospital business. It also puts price pressure on our U.S. Blood Center customers who are also facing reduced demand for red cells. Our Blood Center customers have responded to this pressure by creating their own group purchasing organizations and resorting to single source tenders to create incentives for suppliers, including us, to significantly reduce prices. We expect that market demand, government regulation, third party reimbursement policies, government contracting requirements and societal pressures will continue to change the worldwide healthcare industry, resulting in further business consolidations and alliances among our customers and competitors. This may exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products and adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. Quality problems with our processes, goods, and services could harm our reputation for producing high quality products and erode our competitive advantage, sales, and market share. Quality is extremely important to us and our customers due to the serious and costly consequences of product failure. Our quality certifications are critical to the marketing success of our products and services. If we fail to meet these standards or fail to adapt to evolving standards, our reputation could be damaged, we could lose customers, and our revenue and results of operations could decline. In June 2016, we issued a voluntary recall of certain whole blood collection kits sold to our Blood Center customers in the United States. The recall resulted from some collection sets' filters failing to adequately remove leukocytes from collected blood. Because most U.S. hospitals prefer to transfuse leukoreduced blood, our Blood Center customers may have conducted further tests to confirm the blood was adequately leukoreduced, sold the blood as non leukoreduced at a lower price or discarded the blood collected using the defective sets. As a result of the recall, we recorded total charges of $7.1 million during fiscal 2017 and have an insurance receivable of $29 million as of April 1, 2017. While we believe we have adequate insurance coverage, we may have additional losses in future periods which may or may not be covered by insurance. These losses could have a material impact on our results of operations. 11 Table of Contents An interruption in our ability to manufacture our products, obtain key comp1nts or raw materials, or the failure of a sole source supplier may adversely affect our business. Certain key products are manufactured at single locations with limited alternate facilities. If an event occurs that results in damage to 1 or more of these facilities, we may be unable to supply the relevant products at previous levels or at all. In addition, for reasons of quality assurance or cost effectiveness, we purchase certain finished goods, comp1nts and raw materials from sole suppliers, notably JMS Co. Ltd., Kawasumi Laboratories and Sanmina Corporation, which is the sole manufacturer of all our apheresis equipment. Due to the stringent regulations and requirements of the FDA and other similar non U.S. regulatory agencies regarding the manufacture of our products, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for certain comp1nts or materials. A reduction or interruption in manufacturing, or an inability to secure alternative sources of raw materials or comp1nts, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. Ongoing delays in expanding our liquid solutions production capacity could reduce our revenue, increase our costs, or prevent us from meeting contracted obligations, which could result in financial penalties and have an adverse effect on our results of operations. We primarily produce 2 solutions for use in our apheresis procedures anti coagulant and saline. Anti coagulant is required for each apheresis procedure, including the collection of platelets and plasma. Saline is used by our Plasma customers to provide fluid replacement after a donation. We have been working to expand the capacity of our Union, South Carolina facility to produce both anti coagulant and saline. We have experienced delays in the completion of the project that have required us and a customer to rely on alternative sources of supply. If we are unable to successfully complete the capacity expansion or obtain additional supplies at an appropriate price, our results of operations could continue to be adversely affected. Plastics are the principal comp1nt of our disposables, which are the main source of our revenues. Any change in the price, composition or availability of the plastics we purchase could adversely affect our business. We face risks related to price, composition and availability of the plastic raw materials used in our business. Increases in the price of petroleum derivatives could result in corresponding increases in our costs to procure plastic raw materials. Increases in the costs of other commodities also may affect our procurement costs to a lesser degree. The composition of the plastic we purchase is also important. Today, we purchase plastics which contain phthalates, which are used to make plastic malleable. Should plastics with phthalates become unavailable due to regulatory changes, we may be required to obtain regulatory approvals from FDA and foreign authorities for a number of products. While we have not experienced shortages in the past, any interruption in the supply for certain plastics could have a material impact on our business by limiting our ability to manufacture and sell the products which represent a significant portion of our revenues. As approximately half of our revenue comes from outside the United States, we are subject to negative impacts on our results of operations from currency fluctuation, geopolitical events, economic volatility, violations of anti corruption laws, export and import restrictions, decisions by local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. We do business in over 100 countries and have distributors in approximately 90 countries. This exposes us to currency fluctuation, geopolitical risk, economic volatility, anti corruption laws, export and import restrictions, local regulatory authorities and the laws and medical practices in foreign jurisdictions. If there are sanctions or restrictions on the flow of capital which prevent product importation or receipt of payments in Russia or China, our business could be adversely affected. Our international operations are governed by the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and other similar anti corruption laws in other countries. Generally, these laws prohibit companies and their business partners or other intermediaries from making improper payments to foreign governments and government officials in order to obtain or retain business. Global enforcement of such anti corruption laws has increased in recent years, including aggressive investigations and enforcement proceedings. While we have an active compliance program and various other safeguards to discourage impermissible practices, we have distributors in approximately 90 countries, several of which are considered high risk for corruption. As a result, our global operations carry some risk of unauthorized impermissible activity on the part of 1 of our distributors, employees, agents or consultants. Any alleged or actual violation could subject us to government scrutiny, severe criminal or civil fines, or sanctions on our ability to export product outside the U.S., which could adversely affect our reputation and financial condition. 12 Table of Contents Export of U.S. technology or goods manufactured in the United States to some jurisdictions requires special U.S. export authorization or local market controls that may be influenced by factors, including political dynamics, outside our control. Finally, any other significant changes in the competitive, legal, regulatory, reimbursement or economic environments of the jurisdictions in which we conduct our international business could have a material impact on our business. Our success depends on our ability to attract and retain key personnel needed to successfully operate the business. We constantly monitor the dynamics of the economy, the healthcare industry and the markets in which we compete; and we continue to assess our key personnel that we believe are essential to our long term success. Over the last year, we have hired a new Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and new personnel in a number of key executive positions. We have also effected significant organizational and strategic changes in connection with the addition of these new executives. If we fail to effectively manage our ongoing organizational and strategic changes, our financial condition, results of operations, and reputation, as well as our ability to successfully attract, motivate and retain key employees, could be harmed. Our success also depends upon our ability to attract and retain other qualified managerial and technical personnel. Competition for such personnel is intense. We may not be able to attract and retain personnel necessary for the development of our business. If we are unable to meet our debt obligations or experience a disruption in our cash flows, it could have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cost of borrowing. We have $315.4 million of debt outstanding at April 1, 2017 due before July 1, 2019. The obligations to pay interest and repay the borrowed amounts may restrict our ability to adjust to adverse economic conditions and our ability to fund working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or other general corporate requirements. The interest rate on the loan is variable and subject to change based on market forces. Fluctuations in interest rates could adversely affect our profitability and cash flows. In addition, as a global corporation, we have significant cash reserves held in foreign countries. These balances may not be immediately available to repay our debt. Our credit facilities contain financial covenants that require us to maintain specified financial ratios and make interest and principal payments. If we are unable to satisfy these covenants, we may be required to obtain waivers from our lenders. No assurance can be made that our lenders would grant such waivers on favorable terms, or at all, and we could be required to repay any borrowed amounts on short notice. Our operations and plans for future growth may require additional capital that may not be available to us, or only available to us on unfavorable terms. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including operating requirements, product placements, current and future acquisitions and the need to refinance existing debt. Our ability to issue additional debt or enter into other financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected by our debt levels, unfavorable changes in economic conditions generally or uncertainties that affect the capital markets. Higher borrowing costs or the inability to access capital markets could adversely affect our ability to support future growth and operating requirements and, as a result, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected. As of April 1, 2017 , we had $315.4 million of debt obligations due before July 1, 2019. Refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources within our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for further discussion of our debt obligations. We recorded goodwill and other asset impairment charges that reduced our income during the current fiscal year and may record additional charges in future periods. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually, or on an interim basis between annual tests when events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2017, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test and concluded that we had an impairment of $57.0 million in our North America Blood Center reporting unit, which represented the entire goodwill balance associated with this reporting unit. There were no other reporting units at risk of impairment as of the fiscal 2017 annual test date. The impairment charge recorded does not impact our liquidity, cash flows from operations, future operations, or compliance with debt covenants. During fiscal 2017, we performed a review of certain non core and underperforming assets that were at risk of being impaired due to the recent changes in our strategic direction. This review resulted in the decision to discontinue the use of and investment in certain long lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and intangible assets. Accordingly, during fiscal 2017, we recorded asset impairment charges of $18.1 million associated with this review. The impairment charges recorded do not impact our liquidity, cash flows from operations, future operations, or compliance with debt covenants. 13 Table of Contents Future goodwill impairment charges or other asset impairment charges, if any, could materially adversely impact our results of operations in the period in which they are recorded. We will continue to monitor our intangible assets for potential impairments in future periods. Refer to Critical Accounting Policies within our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K for a discussion of key assumptions used in our testing. As a medical device manufacturer we are subject to a number of laws and regulations. Non compliance with those laws or regulations could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The manufacture, distribution and marketing of our products are subject to regulation by the FDA and other non United States regulatory bodies. We must obtain specific regulatory clearance prior to selling any new product or service, a process which is costly and time consuming. If we are unable to obtain the necessary regulatory clearance we will be unable to introduce new enhanced product. Our operations are also subject to continuous review and monitoring by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Failure to substantially comply with applicable regulations could subject our products to recall or seizure by government authorities, or an order to suspend manufacturing activities. If our products were determined to have design or manufacturing flaws, this could result in their recall or seizure. Either of these situations could also result in the imposition of fines. The European Union regulatory bodies are expected to finalize a new Medical Device Regulation (MDR) in calendar year 2017, replacing the existing directives and providing 3 years for transition and compliance. The MDR is expected to change several aspects of the existing regulatory framework, such as clinical data requirements, and introduce new 1s, such as Unique Device Identification. We, and the notified bodies who will oversee compliance to the new MDR, face uncertainties as the MDR is rolled out and enforced, creating risks in several areas including the CE Marking process and data transparency in the upcoming years. We operate in an industry susceptible to significant product liability claims. Product liability claims could damage our reputation and impair our ability to market our products or obtain professional or product liability insurance, or increase the cost of such insurance. Our products are relied upon by medical personnel in connection with the treatment of patients and the collection of blood or blood comp1nts from donors. In the event that patients or donors sustain injury or death in connection with their condition or treatment, we, along with others, may be sued, and whether or not we are ultimately determined to be liable, we may incur significant legal expenses. These claims may be brought by individuals seeking relief on their own behalf or purporting to represent a class. In addition, product liability claims may be asserted against us in the future based on events we are not aware of at the present time. In addition, such litigation could damage our reputation and, therefore, impair our ability to market our products or obtain professional or product liability insurance, or increase the cost of such insurance. While we believe that our current product liability insurance coverage is sufficient, there is no assurance that such coverage will be adequate to cover incurred liabilities or that we will be able to obtain acceptable product and professional liability coverage in the future. Many of our competitors have significantly greater financial means and resources, which may allow them to more rapidly develop new technologies and more quickly address changes in customer requirements. Our ability to remain competitive depends on a combination of factors. Certain factors are within our control such as reputation, regulatory approvals, patents, unpatented proprietary know how in several technological areas, product quality, safety, cost effectiveness and continued rigorous documentation of clinical performance. Other factors are outside of our control such as regulatory standards, medical standards, reimbursement policies and practices, and the practice of medicine. As a global corporation, we are exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could adversely affect our cash flows and results of operations. International revenues and expenses account for a substantial portion of our operations. In fiscal 2017 , our international revenues accounted for 410% of our total revenues. The exposure to fluctuations in currency exchange rates takes different forms. Reported revenues, as well as manufacturing and operational costs denominated in foreign currencies by our international businesses, fluctuate due to exchange rate movement when translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. Fluctuations in exchange rates could adversely affect our profitability in U.S. dollars of products and services sold by us into international markets, where payment for our products and services and related manufacturing and operational costs is made in local currencies. We are entrusted with sensitive personal information in the course of operating our business and serving our customers. If we suffer a breach of security, our reputation could be harmed and we could incur costs or liabilities. Government agencies require that we implement measures to ensure the integrity and security of such personal data and, in the event of a breach of protocol, that we inform affected individuals. If our systems are not properly designed or implemented, or 14 Table of Contents suffer a breach of security or an intrusion (e.g., hacking ) by unauthorized persons, our reputation could be harmed, and we could incur costs and liabilities to affected persons and enforcement agencies. We rely on the proper function, availability and security of information technology systems to operate our business and to serve our customers and a cyber attack or other breach of these systems could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We rely on information technology systems to process, transmit, and store electronic information in our day to day operations. Similar to other large multi national companies, the size and complexity of our information technology systems makes them vulnerable to a cyber attack, malicious intrusion, breakdown, destruction, loss of data privacy, or other significant disruption. Our information systems require an ongoing commitment of significant resources to maintain, protect, and enhance existing systems and develop new systems to keep pace with continuing changes in information processing technology, evolving systems and regulatory standards, the increasing need to protect patient and customer information, and changing customer patterns. In addition, third parties may attempt to hack into our products to obtain data relating to patients with our products or our proprietary information. Any failure by us to maintain or protect our information technology systems and data integrity, including from cyber attacks, intrusions or other breaches, could result in the unauthorized access to patient data and personally identifiable information, theft of intellectual property or other misappropriation of assets, or otherwise compromise our confidential or proprietary information and disrupt our operations. Any of these events, in turn, may cause us to lose existing customers, have difficulty preventing, detecting, and controlling fraud, have disputes with customers, physicians, and other health care professionals, be subject to legal claims and liability, have regulatory sanctions or penalties imposed, have increases in operating expenses, incur expenses or lose revenues as a result of a data privacy breach or theft of intellectual property, or suffer other adverse consequences, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We are subject to the risks associated with communicable diseases. A significant outbreak of a disease could reduce the demand for our products and affect our ability to provide our customers with products and services. An eligible donor willingness to donate is affected by concerns about their personal health and safety. Concerns about communicable diseases (such as pandemic flu, SARS, or HIV) could reduce the number of donors, and accordingly reduce the demand for our products for a period of time. A significant outbreak of a disease could also affect our employees ability to work, which could limit our ability to produce product and service our customers. There is a risk that our intellectual property may be subject to misappropriation in some countries. Certain countries, particularly China, do not enforce compliance with laws that protect intellectual property rights with the same degree of vigor as is available under the United States and European systems of justice. Further, certain of our intellectual property rights are not registered in China, or if they were, have since expired. This may permit others to produce copies of products in China that are not covered by currently valid patent registrations. There is also a risk that such products may be exported from China to other countries. In order to aggressively protect our intellectual property throughout the world, we have a program of patent disclosures and filings in markets where we conduct significant business. While we believe this program is reasonable and adequate, the risk of loss is inherent in litigation as different legal systems offer different levels of protection to IP, and it is still possible that even patented technologies may not be protected absolutely from infringement. Pending and future intellectual property litigation could be costly and disruptive to us. We operate in an industry that is susceptible to significant intellectual property litigation. This type of litigation is expensive, complex and lengthy and its outcome is difficult to predict. Patent litigation may result in adverse outcomes and could significantly divert the attention of our technical and management personnel. Our products may be determined to infringe another party's patent, which could lead to financial losses or adversely affect our ability to market our products. There is a risk that 1 or more of our products may be determined to infringe a patent held by another party. If this were to occur, we may be subject to an injunction or to payment of royalties, or both, which may adversely affect our ability to market the affected product(s) or otherwise have an adverse effect on our results of operations. In addition, competitors may patent technological advances which may give them a competitive advantage or create barriers to entry. We sell our products in certain emerging economies which exposes us to less mature regulatory systems, more volatile markets for our products, and greater credit risks. A loss of funding for our products or changes to the regulatory regime could lead to lost revenue or account receivables. 15 Table of Contents There are risks with doing business in emerging economies, such as Brazil, Russia, India and China. These economies tend to have less mature product regulatory systems and more volatile financial markets. In addition, the government controlled health care system's ability to invest in our products and systems may abruptly shift due to changing government priorities or funding capacity. Our ability to sell products in these economies is dependent upon our ability to hire qualified employees or agents to represent our products locally, and our ability to obtain and maintain the necessary regulatory approvals in a less mature regulatory environment. If we are unable to retain qualified representatives or maintain the necessary regulatory approvals, we will not be able to continue to sell products in these markets. We are exposed to a higher degree of financial risk if we extend credit to customers in these economies. In many of the international markets in which we do business, including certain parts of Europe, South America, the Middle East, Russia and Asia, our employees, agents or distributors offer to sell our products in response to public tenders issued by various governmental agencies. There is additional risk in selling our products through agents or distributors, particularly in public tenders. If they misrepresent our products, do not provide appropriate service and delivery, or commit a violation of local or U.S. law, our reputation could be harmed, and we could be subject to fines, sanctions or both. We have a complex global supply chain which includes key sole source suppliers. Disruptions to this system could delay our ability to deliver finished products. We have a complex global supply chain which involves integrating key suppliers and our manufacturing capacity into a global movement of comp1nts and finished goods. We have certain key suppliers, including JMS Co. Ltd., Kawasumi Laboratories and Sanmina Corporation, who have their own complex supply chains throughout Asia. Any disruption to 1 or more of our suppliers production or delivery of sufficient volumes of comp1nts conforming to our specifications could disrupt or delay our ability to deliver finished products to our customers. For example, we purchase comp1nts in Asia for use in manufacturing in the United States, Puerto Rico and Mexico. We source all of our apheresis equipment from Asia and regularly ship finished goods from the United States, Puerto Rico and Mexico to the rest of the world. Due to the high standards and FDA requirements applicable to manufacturing our products, such as the FDA's Quality System Regulation and Good Manufacturing Practices, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement sources for certain raw materials, comp1nts or finished goods. We might be forced to purchase substantial inventory, if available, to last until we are able to qualify an alternate supplier. If we cannot obtain a necessary comp1nt, we may need to find, test and obtain regulatory approval or clearance for a replacement comp1nt, produce the comp1nt ourselves or redesign the related product, which would cause significant delay and could increase our manufacturing costs. In the event that we are unable to obtain sufficient quantities of raw materials, comp1nts or finished goods on commercially reasonable terms or in a timely manner, our ability to manufacture our products on a timely and cost competitive basis may be compromised, which may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our effective tax rate may fluctuate and we may incur obligations in tax jurisdictions in excess of amounts that have been accrued. As a global company, we are subject to taxation in numerous countries, states and other jurisdictions. In preparing our financial statements, we record the amount of tax payable in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Our future effective tax rate, however, may be lower or higher than prior years due to numerous factors, including a change in our geographic earnings mix, changes in the measurement of our deferred taxes, and recently enacted and future tax law changes in jurisdictions in which we operate. Changes in our operations, including headcount in Switzerland, Puerto Rico or Malaysia, could adversely affect our tax rate due to favorable tax rulings in these jurisdiction. We are also subject to tax audits in various jurisdictions, and tax authorities may disagree with certain positions we have taken and assess additional taxes. Any of these factors could cause us to experience an effective tax rate significantly different from previous periods or our current expectations, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, and cash flows. Changes in tax laws or exposure to additional income tax liabilities could have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations and or liquidity. We are subject to income taxes, non income based taxes and tax audits, in both the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. Tax authorities may disagree with certain positions we have taken and assess additional taxes. We regularly assess the likely outcomes of these audits in order to determine the appropriateness of our tax provision and have established contingency reserves for material, 16 Table of Contents known tax exposures. However, the calculation of such tax exposures involves the application of complex tax laws and regulations in many jurisdictions, as well as interpretations as to the legality under various rules in certain jurisdictions. Therefore, there can be no assurance that we will accurately predict the outcomes of these disputes or other tax audits or that issues raised by tax authorities will be resolved at a financial cost that does not exceed our related reserves, and the actual outcomes of these disputes and other tax audits could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition. In addition, further changes in the tax laws of foreign jurisdictions could arise, including as a result of the base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) project undertaken by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD, which represents a coalition of member countries, has issued recommendations that, in some cases, would make substantial changes to numerous long standing tax positions and principles. These contemplated changes, to the extent adopted by OECD members and or other countries, could increase tax uncertainty and may adversely affect our provision for income taxes. Our products are made with materials which are subject to regulation by governmental agencies. An agency's prohibition of certain compounds could disrupt our manufacturing operations and delivery of finished products to our customers. Environmental regulations may prohibit the use of certain compounds in products we market and sell in regulated markets. If we are unable to substitute suitable materials into our processes, our manufacturing operations may be disrupted. In addition, we may be obligated to disclose the origin of certain materials used in our products, including but not limited to, metals mined from locations which have been the site of human rights violations. We have disclosed material weaknesses in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to our accounting for inventory, which could adversely affect our ability to report our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows accurately and on a timely basis. In connection with our assessment of internal controls over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002, we identified a material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to our accounting for inventory. For a discussion of our internal controls over financial reporting and a description of the identified material weakness, see Controls and Procedures contained in Item 9A of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal controls over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. During fiscal 2017, management's assessment identified control deficiencies in internal control over financial reporting related to the valuation of our inventory and cost of goods sold. Specifically, we identified a deficiency in the internal controls executed to appropriately account for manufacturing variances in inventory on our consolidated balance sheet and cost of goods sold on our consolidated statements of operations. Management determined that its accounting process for amortizing manufacturing variances to cost of goods sold lacked adequate levels of monitoring and review controls to appropriately identify and correct errors in the calculation in a timely manner. While reported inventory and related accounts are accurate as of April 1, 2017, the material weakness resulted in errors in these accounts in prior periods. As a result of this deficiency, until it is substantially remediated, it is possible that internal controls over financial reporting may not prevent or detect errors in the accounting for inventory as reflected in our financial statements. While actions have been taken to improve our internal controls in response to the identified material weakness related to certain aspects of accounting for inventory, additional work continues to address and remediate the identified material weaknesses. Until these actions are fully implemented and tested, the material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting relating to inventory will continue to exist. As a result, our ability to accurately report, on a timely basis, our future financial condition, results of operations or cash flows may be adversely affected. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
