CIK: 320193
Company Name: APPLE INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-10-26
Accession Number: 0001193125-11-282113


Item 1 Business Company Background Apple Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries (collectively Apple or the Company ) designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, ne2rking solutions, and third party digital content and applications. The Company products and services include iPh1 , iPad , Mac , iPod , Apple TV , a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the iOS and Mac OS X operating systems, iCloud , and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company also sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store , App Store SM , iBookstore SM , and Mac App Store. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, as well as through third party cellular ne2rk carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third party iPh1, iPad, Mac and iPod compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headph1s, and various other accessories and peripherals, through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid sized businesses ( SMB ), and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company fiscal year is the 52 or 53 week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. Unless otherwise stated, all information presented in this Form 10 K is based on the Company fiscal calendar. The Company is a California corporation established in 1977. Business Strategy The Company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, and services. The Company business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with superior ease of use, seamless integration, and innovative design. The Company believes continual investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and technologies. As part of its strategy, the Company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store. As part of the iTunes Store, the Company App Store and iBookstore allow customers to discover and download applications and books through either a Mac or Windows based computer or through iOS devices, namely iPh1, iPad and iPod touch . In January 2011, the Company opened the Mac App Store to allow customers to easily discover, download and install applications for their Macs. The Company also supports a community for the development of third party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the Company offerings. The Company strategy also includes expanding its distribution ne2rk to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high quality sales and post sales support experience. 1 Consumer and Small and Mid Sized Business The Company believes a high quality buying experience with knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the Company products and services greatly enhances its ability to attract and retain customers. The Company sells many of its products and resells third party products in most of its major markets directly to consumers and businesses through its retail and online stores. The Company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of product expertise, integration and support services. The Company retail stores are typically located at high traffic locations in quality shopping malls and urban shopping districts. By operating its own stores and locating them in desirable high traffic locations, the Company is better positi1d to ensure a high quality customer buying experience and attract new customers. The stores are designed to simplify and enhance the presentation and marketing of the Company products and related solutions. To that end, retail store configurations have evolved into various sizes to accommodate market specific demands. The Company believes providing direct contact with its customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors. The stores employ experienced and knowledgeable personnel who provide product advice, service and training. The stores offer a wide selection of third party hardware, software, and other accessories and peripherals that complement the Company products. Education Throughout its history, the Company has been committed to delivering solutions to help educators teach and students learn. The Company believes effective integration of technology into classroom instruction can result in higher levels of student achievement and has designed a range of products, services and programs to address the needs of education customers. The Company also supports mobile learning and real time distribution and accessibility of education related materials through iTunes U , a platform that allows students and teachers to share and distribute educational media online. The Company sells its products to the education market through its direct sales force, select third party resellers and its online and retail stores. Enterprise and Government The Company also sells its hardware and software products to enterprise and government customers in each of its geographic segments. The Company products are deployed in these markets because of their power, productivity, ease of use and the simplicity of seamless integration into information technology environments. The Company products are compatible with thousands of third party business applications and services, and its tools enable the development and secure deployment of custom applications as well as remote device administration. Business Organization The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. Accordingly, the Company has determined that its reportable operating segments, which are generally based on the nature and location of its customers, consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, Asia Pacific and Retail. The results of the Americas, Europe, Japan and Asia Pacific reportable segments do not include the results of the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and Asian countries, other than Japan. The Retail segment operates Apple retail stores worldwide. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company operating segments may be found in I, Item 7 of this Form 10 K under the subheading Segment Operating Performance, and in I, Item 8 of this Form 10 K in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 8, Segment Information and Geographic Data. 2 Products The Company offers a range of mobile communication and media devices, personal computing products, and portable digital music players, as well as a variety of related software, services, peripherals, ne2rking solutions and third party hardware and software products. In addition, the Company offers its own software products, including iOS, the Company proprietary mobile operating system; Mac OS X, the Company proprietary operating system software for the Mac; server software and application software for consumer, SMB, and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company primary products are discussed below. iPh1 iPh1 combines a mobile ph1, an iPod, and an Internet communications device in a single handheld product. Based on the Company Multi Touch user interface, iPh1 features desktop class email, web browsing, searching, and maps and is compatible with both Macs and Windows based computers. iPh1 automatically syncs content from users iTunes libraries, as well as contacts, bookmarks, and email accounts. iPh1 allows customers to access the iTunes Store to download audio and video files, as well as a variety of other digital content and applications. In October 2011, the Company launched iPh1 4S, its latest version of iPh1, which includes Siri , a voice activated intelligent assistant. In addition to the Company own iPh1 accessories, third party iPh1 compatible accessories are available through the Company online and retail stores and from third parties. iPad iPad is a multi purpose mobile device for browsing the web, reading and sending email, viewing photos, watching videos, listening to music, playing games, reading e books and more. iPad is based on the Company Multi Touch technology and allows customers to connect with their applications and content in a more interactive way. iPad allows customers to access the iTunes Store to download audio and video files, as well as a variety of other digital content and applications. In March 2011, the Company introduced iPad 2, its second generation iPad. In addition to the Company own iPad accessories, third party iPad compatible accessories are available through the Company online and retail stores and from third parties. Mac Hardware Products The Company offers a range of personal computing products including desktop and portable computers, related devices and peripherals, and third party hardware products. The Company Mac desktop and portable systems feature Intel microprocessors, the Mac OS X Lion operating system and the iLife suite of software for creation and management of digital photography, music, movies, DVDs and websites. The Company desktop computers include iMac , Mac Pro and Mac mini. The iMac desktop computer has an all in 1 design that incorporates a display, processor, graphics card, storage, memory and other comp1nts inside a single enclosure. The Mac Pro desktop computer is targeted at business and professional customers and is designed to meet the performance, expansion, and ne2rking needs of the most demanding Mac user. The Mac mini is a desktop computer in a compact enclosure. The Company portable computers include MacBook Pro and MacBook Air . MacBook Pro is a portable computer designed for professionals and consumers. MacBook Air is an ultra slim portable computer designed for professionals and consumers. iPod The Company iPod line of portable digital music and media players includes iPod touch, iPod nano , iPod shuffle and iPod classic . All iPods work with iTunes. In addition to the Company own iPod accessories, third party iPod compatible accessories are available, through the Company online and retail stores or from third parties. 3 The iPod touch, based on iOS, is a flash memory based iPod with a widescreen display and a Multi Touch user interface. iPod touch allows customers to access the iTunes Store to download audio and video content, as well as a variety of digital applications. The iPod nano is a flash memory based iPod that features the Company Multi Touch interface allowing customers to navigate their music collection by tapping or swiping the display. The iPod nano features a polished aluminum and glass enclosure with a built in clip. The iPod shuffle is a flash memory based iPod that features a clickable control pad to control music playback and VoiceOver technology enabling customers to hear song titles, artists and playlist names. The iPod classic is a hard drive based portable digital music and video player. iTunes iTunes is an application that supports the purchase, download, organization and playback of digital audio and video files and is available for both Mac and Windows based computers. iTunes 10 is the latest version of iTunes and features AirPlay wireless music playback, Genius Mixes, Home Sharing, and improved syncing functionality with iOS devices. iTunes is integrated with the iTunes Store , a service that allows customers to discover, purchase, rent, and download digital content and applications. The iTunes Store includes the App Store and iBookstore. The App Store allows customers to discover and download applications, and the iBookstore features electronic books from major and independent publishers and allows customers to preview and buy books for their iOS devices. Customers can access the App Store through either a Mac or Windows based computer or through an iOS device. The iBookstore is accessed through the iBooks application on an iOS device. Mac App Store In January 2011, the Company opened the Mac App Store allowing customers to discover, download and install applications for their Macs. The Mac App Store offers applications in education, games, graphics and design, lifestyle, productivity, utilities and other categories. The Company Mac OS X operating system software and iLife and iWork application software are also available on the Mac App Store. iCloud In October 2011, the Company launched iCloud, its new cloud service, which stores music, photos, applications, contacts, calendars, and documents and wirelessly pushes them to multiple iOS devices, Macs and Windows based computers. iCloud features include iTunes in the Cloud, Photo Stream, Documents in the Cloud, Contacts, Calendar, Mail, automatic downloads and purchase history for applications and iBooks, and iCloud Backup. Users can sign up for free access to iCloud using a device running iOS 5 or a Mac running Mac OS X Lion. Software Products and Computer Technologies The Company offers a range of software products for consumer, SMB, education, enterprise and government customers, including the Company proprietary iOS and Mac OS X operating system software; server software; professional application software; and consumer, education, and business oriented application software. Operating System Software iOS iOS is the Company mobile operating system that serves as the foundation for iOS devices. In October 2011, the Company released iOS 5, which supports iCloud and includes new features such as Notification Center, a way to view and manage notifications in 1 place; iMessage , a messaging service that allows users to send text messages, photos and videos between iOS devices; and Newsstand, a way to purchase and organize newspaper and magazine subscriptions. 4 Mac OS X Mac OS X, the operating system for Macs, is built on an open source UNIX based foundation. Mac OS X Lion is the eighth major release of Mac OS X and became available in July 2011 Mac OS X Lion includes support for new Multi Touch gestures; iCloud integration; system wide support for full screen applications; Mission Control , a way to view everything running on a user Mac; the Mac App Store; Launchpad , a new home for a user applications; and a redesigned Mail application. Application Software iLife iLife 11 is the latest version of the Company consumer oriented digital lifestyle application suite included with all Mac computers. iLife features iPhoto , iMovie , iDVD , GarageBand , and iWeb . iPhoto is the Company consumer oriented digital photo application and iMovie is the Company consumer oriented digital video editing software application. iDVD is the Company consumer oriented software application that enables customers to turn iMovie files, QuickTime files, and digital pictures into interactive DVDs. GarageBand is the Company consumer oriented music creation application that allows customers to play, record and create music. iWeb allows customers to create online photo albums, blogs and podcasts, and to customize websites using editing tools. iWork iWork 09 is the latest version of the Company integrated productivity suite designed to help users create, present, and publish documents, presentations, and spreadsheets. iWork 09 includes Pages 09 for word processing and page layout, Keynote 09 for presentations, and Numbers 09 for spreadsheets. The Company also has a Multi Touch version of each iWork application designed specifically for use on iOS devices. Other Application Software The Company also sells various other application software, including Final Cut Pro , Logic Studio , Logic Express 9, Logic Studio Pro, and its FileMaker Pro database software. Displays & Peripheral Products The Company manufactures the Apple LED Cinema Display and Thunderbolt Display. The Company also sells a variety of Apple branded and third party Mac compatible and iOS compatible peripheral products, including printers, storage devices, computer memory, digital video and still cameras, and various other computing products and supplies. Apple TV Apple TV allows customers to watch movies and television shows on their high definition television. Content from iTunes, Netflix, YouTube, and Flickr as well as music, photos, videos, and podcasts from a Mac or Windows based computer can also be wirelessly streamed to a television through Apple TV. With the release of iCloud in October 2011, content purchased on Apple TV can be re downloaded on iOS devices. Product Support and Services AppleCare offers a range of support options for the Company customers. These options include assistance that is built into software products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, and the AppleCare Protection Plan ( APP ). APP is a fee based service that typically includes 2 to 3 years of ph1 support and hardware repairs and dedicated web based support resources. 5 Markets and Distribution The Company customers are primarily in the consumer, SMB, and education, enterprise and government markets. The Company uses a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, such as its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third party cellular ne2rk carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value added resellers. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware and software integration, and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. The Company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high quality sales and after sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. Additionally, the Company has invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2011 or 2010. 1 of the Company customers accounted for 11% of net sales in 2009. Competition The markets for the Company products and services are highly competitive and the Company is confronted by aggressive competition in all areas of its business. These markets are characterized by frequent product introductions and rapid technological advances that have substantially increased the capabilities and use of mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and other digital electronic devices. The Company competitors who sell mobile devices and personal computers based on other operating systems have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins to gain or maintain market share. The Company financial condition and operating results can be adversely affected by these and other industry wide downward pressures on gross margins. Principal competitive factors important to the Company include price, product features, relative price performance, product quality and reliability, design innovation, a strong third party software and peripherals ecosystem, marketing and distribution capability, service and support, and corporate reputation. The Company is focused on expanding its market opportunities related to mobile communication and media devices. These industries are highly competitive and include several large, well funded and experienced participants. The Company expects competition in these industries to intensify significantly as competitors attempt to imitate some of the features of the Company products and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more competitive than those they currently offer. These industries are characterized by aggressive pricing practices, frequent product introductions, evolving design approaches and technologies, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses. The Company digital content services have faced significant competition from other companies promoting their own digital music and content products and services, including those offering free peer to peer music and video services. The Company believes it offers superior innovation and integration of the entire solution including the hardware (iPh1, iPad, Mac, and iPod), software (iTunes), and distribution of digital content and applications (iTunes Store, App Store, iBookstore and Mac App Store). Some of the Company current and potential competitors have substantial resources and may be able to provide such products and services at little or no profit or even at a loss to compete with the Company offerings. The Company future financial condition and operating results depend on the Company ability to continue to develop and offer new innovative products and services in each of the markets it competes in. 6 Supply of Comp1nts Although most comp1nts essential to the Company business are generally available from multiple sources, a number of comp1nts are currently obtained from single or limited sources, which subjects the Company to significant supply and pricing risks. Many comp1nts are at times subject to industry wide shortages and significant commodity pricing fluctuations. In addition, the Company has entered into various agreements for the supply of comp1nts; however there can be no guarantee that the Company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. Therefore, the Company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that can materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results. The Company and other participants in the mobile communication and media device, and personal computer industries compete for various comp1nts with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company also uses some custom comp1nts that are not common to the rest of these industries, and new products introduced by the Company often utilize custom comp1nts available from only 1 source. When a comp1nt or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. If the Company supply of comp1nts for a new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if a key manufacturing vendor delayed shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company business and financial performance could also be materially adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an alternative source. Continued availability of these comp1nts at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers concentrated on the production of common comp1nts instead of comp1nts customized to meet the Company requirements. Substantially all of the Company hardware products are manufactured by outsourcing partners primarily located in Asia. A significant concentration of this manufacturing is currently performed by a small number of outsourcing partners, often in single locations. Certain of these outsourcing partners are the sole sourced suppliers of comp1nts and manufacturer for many of the Company products. Although the Company works closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the Company operating results could be adversely affected if its outsourcing partners were unable to meet their production commitments. The Company purchase commitments typically cover the Company requirements for periods up to 150 days. Research and Development Because the industries in which the Company competes are characterized by rapid technological advances, the Company ability to compete successfully depends heavily upon its ability to ensure a continual and timely flow of competitive products, services and technologies to the marketplace. The Company continues to develop new technologies to enhance existing products and to expand the range of its product offerings through research and development, licensing of intellectual property and acquisition of third party businesses and technology. Total research and development expense was $24 billion, $18 billion and $13 billion in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Patents, Trademarks, Copyrights and Licenses The Company currently holds rights to patents and copyrights relating to certain aspects of its iPh1, iPad, Mac and iPod devices, peripherals, software and services. The Company has registered or has applied for trademarks and service marks in the U.S. and a number of foreign countries. Although the Company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and service marks is an important factor in its business and that its success does depend in part on the ownership thereof, the Company relies primarily on the innovative skills, technical competence and marketing abilities of its personnel. 7 The Company regularly files patent applications to protect inventions arising from its research and development, and is currently pursuing thousands of patent applications around the world. Over time, the Company has accumulated a large portfolio of issued patents in the U.S. and worldwide. The Company holds copyrights relating to certain aspects of its products and services. No single patent or copyright is solely responsible for protecting the Company products. The Company believes the duration of its patents is adequate relative to the expected lives of its products. Due to the fast pace of innovation and product development, the Company products are often obsolete before the patents related to them expire, and sometimes are obsolete before the patents related to them are even granted. Many of the Company products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third parties. While it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, based upon past experience and industry practice, the Company believes such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms; however, there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained at all. Because of technological changes in the industries in which the Company competes, current extensive patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible that certain comp1nts of the Company products and business methods may unknowingly infringe existing patents or intellectual property rights of others. From time to time, the Company has been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights of third parties. Foreign and Domestic Operations and Geographic Data The U.S. represents the Company largest geographic market. Approximately 39% of the Company net sales in 2011 came from sales to customers inside the U.S. Final assembly of the Company products is currently performed in the Company manufacturing facility in Ireland, and by outsourcing partners, primarily located in Asia. The supply and manufacture of a number of comp1nts is performed by sole sourced outsourcing partners in the U.S., Asia and Europe. Single sourced outsourcing partners in Asia perform final assembly of substantially all of the Company hardware products. Margins on sales of the Company products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include comp1nts obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. Information regarding financial data by geographic segment is set forth in I, Item 7 and Item 8 of this Form 10 K and in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 8, Segment Information and Geographic Data. Seasonal Business The Company has historically experienced increased net sales in its first fiscal quarter compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due to increased holiday seasonal demand. This historical pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company future net sales or financial performance. Warranty The Company offers a limited parts and labor warranty on most of its hardware products. The basic warranty period is typically 1 year from the date of purchase by the original end user. The Company also offers a 90 day basic warranty for its service parts used to repair the Company hardware products. In addition, consumers may purchase the APP, which extends service coverage on many of the Company hardware products in most of its major markets. Backlog In the Company experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions as customers anticipate shortages. Backlog is often reduced once customers 8 believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. Employees As of September 24, 2011, the Company had approximately 60,400 full time equivalent employees and an additional 2,900 full time equivalent temporary employees and contractors. Available Information The Company Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to reports filed pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended ( Exchange Act ), are filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). Such reports and other information filed by the Company with the SEC are available free of charge on the Company website at www.apple.com investor when such reports are available on the SEC website. The public may read and copy any materials filed by the Company with the SEC at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Room 1580, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC at www.sec.gov . The contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. Further, the Company references to the URLs for these websites are intended to be inactive textual references only. Item 1A. Risk Factors Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company financial condition and operating results, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. Global economic conditions could materially adversely affect the Company. The Company operations and performance depend significantly on worldwide economic conditions. Uncertainty about global economic conditions poses a risk as consumers and businesses postp1 spending in response to tighter credit, unemployment, negative financial news and or declines in income or asset values, which could have a material negative effect on demand for the Company products and services. Demand also could differ materially from the Company expectations because the Company generally raises prices on goods and services sold outside the U.S. to offset the effect of a strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Other factors that could influence demand include increases in fuel and other energy costs, conditions in the real estate and mortgage markets, unemployment, labor and healthcare costs, access to credit, consumer confidence, and other macroeconomic factors affecting consumer spending behavior. These and other economic factors could materially adversely affect demand for the Company products and services and the Company financial condition and operating results. In the event of financial turmoil affecting the banking system and financial markets, additional consolidation of the financial services industry, or significant financial service institution failures, there could be a new or incremental tightening in the credit markets, low liquidity, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency, and equity markets. This could have a number of effects on the Company business, including the insolvency or financial instability of outsourcing partners or suppliers or their inability to obtain credit to finance development and or manufacture products resulting in product delays; inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to finance purchases of the Company products; and failure of derivative counterparties and other financial institutions. Other income and expense also could vary materially from expectations depending on gains or losses realized on the sale or exchange of financial instruments; impairment charges resulting from revaluations of debt and equity securities and other investments; interest rates; cash balances; and 9 changes in fair value of derivative instruments. Increased volatility in the financial markets and overall economic uncertainty would increase the risk of the actual amounts realized in the future on the Company financial instruments differing significantly from the fair values currently assigned to them. Global markets for the Company products and services are highly competitive and subject to rapid technological change. If the Company is unable to compete effectively in these markets, its financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company products and services compete in highly competitive global markets characterized by aggressive price cutting, with resulting downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product price performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors, and price sensitivity on the part of consumers. The Company ability to compete successfully depends heavily on its ability to ensure a continuing and timely introduction of innovative new products and technologies to the marketplace. The Company believes it is unique in that it designs and develops nearly the entire solution for its products, including the hardware, operating system, numerous software applications, and related services. As a result, the Company must make significant investments in research and development and as such, the Company currently holds a significant number of patents and copyrights and has registered and or has applied to register numerous patents, trademarks and service marks. By contrast, many of the Company competitors seek to compete primarily through aggressive pricing and very low cost structures. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new products with attractive margins or if other companies infringe on the Company intellectual property, the Company ability to maintain a competitive advantage could be negatively affected and its financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company markets certain mobile communication and media devices based on the iOS mobile operating system and also markets related third party digital content and applications. The Company faces substantial competition in these markets from companies that have significant technical, marketing, distribution and other resources, as well as established hardware, software and digital content supplier relationships. Additionally, the Company faces significant price competition as competitors reduce their selling prices and attempt to imitate the Company product features and applications within their own products or, alternatively, collaborate with each other to offer solutions that are more competitive than those they currently offer. The Company also competes with illegitimate ways to obtain third party digital content and applications. The Company has entered the mobile communications and media device markets, and some of its competitors in these markets have greater experience, product breadth and distribution channels than the Company. Because some current and potential competitors have substantial resources and or experience and a lower cost structure, they may be able to provide such products and services at little or no profit or even at a loss. The Company also expects competition to intensify as competitors attempt to imitate the Company approach to providing these comp1nts seamlessly within their individual offerings or work collaboratively to offer integrated solutions. The Company financial condition and operating results depend substantially on the Company ability to continually improve iOS and iOS devices in order to maintain their functional and design advantages. The Company is the only authorized maker of hardware using Mac OS X, which has a minority market share in the personal computer market. This market is dominated by computer makers using competing operating systems, most notably Windows. In the market for personal computers and peripherals, the Company faces a significant number of competitors, many of which have broader product lines, lower priced products, and a larger installed customer base. Consolidation in this market has resulted in larger and potentially stronger competitors. Price competition has been particularly intense as competitors selling Windows based personal computers have aggressively cut prices and lowered product margins. An increasing number of Internet devices that include software applications and are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers compete for market share with the Company existing products. The Company financial condition and operating results depend substantially on its ability to continually improve the Mac platform to maintain its functional and design advantages. 10 There can be no assurance the Company will be able to continue to provide products and services that compete effectively. To remain competitive and stimulate customer demand, the Company must successfully manage frequent product introductions and transitions. Due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of the industries in which the Company competes, the Company must continually introduce new products, services and technologies, enhance existing products and services, and effectively stimulate customer demand for new and upgraded products. The success of new product introductions depends on a number of factors including but not limited to timely and successful product development, market acceptance, the Company ability to manage the risks associated with new products and production ramp issues, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of purchase commitments and inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities and costs to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect of new product introductions and transitions on its financial condition and operating results. The Company faces substantial inventory and other asset risk in addition to purchase commitment cancellation risk. The Company records a write down for product and comp1nt inventories that have become obsolete or exceed anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary cancellation fee reserves for orders of excess products and comp1nts. The Company also reviews its long lived assets for impairment whenever events or changed circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that impairment has occurred, it records a write down equal to the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds its fair market value. Although the Company believes its provisions related to inventory, other assets and purchase commitments are currently adequate, no assurance can be given that the Company will not incur additional related charges given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the industries in which the Company competes. Such charges could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company must order comp1nts for its products and build inventory in advance of product announcements and shipments. Consistent with industry practice, comp1nts are normally acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, open orders and, where appropriate, inventory comp1nt prepayments, in each case based on projected demand. Such purchase commitments typically cover forecasted comp1nt and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. Because the Company markets are volatile, competitive and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and order or produce excess or insufficient amounts of comp1nts or products, or not fully utilize firm purchase commitments. The Company financial condition and operating results have been in the past and could be in the future materially adversely affected by the Company ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short term shifts in customer demand patterns. Future operating results depend upon the Company ability to obtain comp1nts in sufficient quantities. Because the Company currently obtains comp1nts from single or limited sources, the Company is subject to significant supply and pricing risks. Many comp1nts that are available from multiple sources are at times subject to industry wide shortages and significant commodity pricing fluctuations. The Company has entered into various agreements for the supply of comp1nts; there can be no guarantee that the Company will be able to extend or renew these agreements on similar terms, or at all. The follow on effects from the credit crisis on the Company suppliers, referred to in Economic conditions could materially adversely affect the Company above, also could affect the Company ability to obtain comp1nts. Therefore, the Company remains subject to significant risks of supply shortages and price increases that could materially adversely affect the Company 11 financial condition and operating results. The Company expects to experience decreases in its gross margin percentage in future periods, as compared to levels achieved during 2011, largely due to a higher mix of new and innovative products with flat or reduced pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, and potential future comp1nt cost and other cost increases. The Company and other participants in the mobile communication and media device, and personal computer industries compete for various comp1nts with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some custom comp1nts that are not common to the rest of these industries. The Company new products often utilize custom comp1nts available from only 1 source. When a comp1nt or product uses new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until the suppliers yields have matured or manufacturing capacity has increased. Continued availability of these comp1nts at acceptable prices, or at all, may be affected if those suppliers decided to concentrate on the production of common comp1nts instead of comp1nts customized to meet the Company requirements. If the supply of comp1nts for a new or existing product were delayed or constrained, or if a key manufacturing vendor delayed shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company depends on comp1nt and product manufacturing and logistical services provided by outsourcing partners, many of whom are located outside of the U.S. Substantially all of the Company manufacturing is performed in whole or in part by a few outsourcing partners primarily located in Asia. The Company has also outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While these arrangements may lower operating costs, they also reduce the Company direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of products or services, or the Company flexibility to respond to changing conditions. Although arrangements with these partners may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain responsible to the consumer for warranty service in the event of product defects. The Company also relies on its partners to adhere to the Company supplier code of conduct. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with outsourcing partners or otherwise, or material violations of the supplier code of conduct, could materially adversely affect the Company reputation, financial condition and operating results. The supply and manufacture of many critical comp1nts is performed by sole sourced outsourcing partners in the U.S., Asia and Europe. Single sourced outsourcing partners in Asia perform final assembly of substantially all of the Company hardware products. If manufacturing or logistics in these locations is disrupted for any reason including, but not limited to, natural and man made disasters, information technology system failures, military actions or economic, business, labor, environmental, public health, or political issues, the Company financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. The Company relies on third party intellectual property and digital content, which may not be available to the Company on commercially reasonable terms or at all. Many of the Company products include third party intellectual property, which requires licenses from those third parties. Based on past experience and industry practice, the Company believes such licenses generally could be obtained on reasonable terms. There is however no assurance that the necessary licenses could be obtained on acceptable terms or at all. If the Company is unable to obtain or renew critical licenses on reasonable terms, its financial condition and operating results may be materially adversely affected. The Company also contracts with third parties to offer their digital content through the iTunes Store. The licensing arrangements with these third parties are short term and do not guarantee the continuation or renewal of these arrangements on reasonable terms, if at all. Some third party content providers currently or in the future may offer competing products and services, and could take action to make it more difficult or impossible for the 12 Company to license their content in the future. Other content owners, providers or distributors may seek to limit the Company access to, or increase the cost of, such content. If the Company is unable to continue to offer a wide variety of content at reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue to expand its geographic reach, the Company financial condition and operating results may be materially adversely affected. Many third party content providers require the Company to provide digital rights management ( DRM ) and other security solutions. If these requirements change, the Company may have to develop or license new technology to provide these solutions. There is no assurance the Company will be able to develop or license such solutions at a reasonable cost and in a timely manner. In addition, certain countries have passed or may propose legislation that would force the Company to license its DRM, which could lessen the protection of content and subject it to piracy and also could affect arrangements with the Company content providers. The Company future results could be materially adversely affected if it is found to have infringed on intellectual property rights. Technology companies, including many of the Company competitors, frequently enter into litigation based on allegations of patent infringement or other violations of intellectual property rights. In addition, patent holding companies seek to m1tize patents they have purchased or otherwise obtained. As the Company has grown, the intellectual property rights claims against it have increased and may continue to increase. In particular, the Company cellular enabled products compete with mobile communication and media device companies that hold significant patent portfolios, and the number of patent claims against the Company has significantly increased. The Company is vigorously defending infringement actions in courts in a number of U.S. jurisdictions and before the U.S. International Trade Commission, as well as internationally in Europe and Asia. The plaintiffs in these actions frequently seek injunctions and substantial damages. Regardless of the scope or validity of such patents or the merits of any patent claims by potential or actual litigants, the Company may have to engage in protracted litigation. If the Company is found to infringe 1 or more patents, it may be required to pay substantial damages. If there is a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting the Company from marketing or selling certain products or a successful claim of infringement against the Company requiring it to pay royalties to a third party, its financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected, regardless of whether it can develop non infringing technology. In certain cases, the Company may consider the desirability of entering into licensing agreements, although no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. These licenses may also significantly increase the Company operating expenses. In management opinion there is not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies, including matters related to infringement of intellectual property rights. However, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if 1 or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of management expectations, the Company consolidated financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. The Company future performance depends in part on support from third party software developers. The Company believes decisions by customers to purchase its hardware products depend in part on the availability of third party software applications and services. There is no assurance that third party developers will continue to develop and maintain software applications and services for the Company products. If third party software applications and services cease to be developed and maintained for the Company products, customers may choose not to buy the Company products, which could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. 13 With respect to its Mac products, the Company believes the availability of third party software applications and services depends in part on the developers perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading such software for the Company products compared to Windows based products. This analysis may be based on factors such as the perceived strength of the Company and its products, the anticipated revenue that may be generated, continued acceptance by customers of Mac OS X, and the costs of developing such applications and services. If the Company minority share of the global personal computer market causes developers to question the Company prospects, developers could be less inclined to develop or upgrade software for the Company products and more inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the larger Windows market. With respect to iOS devices, the Company relies on the continued availability and development of compelling and innovative software applications, which are distributed through a single distribution channel, the App Store. The absence of multiple distribution channels, which are available for competing platforms, may limit the availability and acceptance of third party applications by the Company customers, thereby causing developers to reduce or curtail development for the iOS platform. In addition, iOS devices are subject to rapid technological change, and, if third party developers are unable to or choose not to keep up with this pace of change, third party applications might not successfully operate and may result in dissatisfied customers. As with applications for the Company Mac products, the availability and development of these applications also depend on developers perceptions and analysis of the relative benefits of developing software for the Company products rather than its competitors products, including devices that use competing platforms. If developers focus their efforts on these competing platforms, the availability and quality of applications for the Company devices may suffer. The Company future operating performance depends on the performance of distributors, carriers and other resellers. The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers, and value added resellers, many of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. The Company also sells many of its products and third party products in most of its major markets directly to education customers, cellular ne2rk carriers distribution channels, resellers and consumers through its online and retail stores. Carriers providing cellular ne2rk service for iPh1 typically subsidize users purchase of the device. There is no assurance that such subsidies will be continued at all or in the same amounts upon renewal of the Company agreements with these carriers or in agreements the Company enters into with new carriers. Many resellers have narrow operating margins and have been negatively affected in the past by weak economic conditions. Some resellers have perceived the expansion of the Company direct sales as conflicting with their business interests as distributors and resellers of the Company products. Such a perception could discourage resellers from investing resources in the distribution and sale of the Company products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of those products. The Company has invested and will continue to invest in programs to enhance reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers stores with Company employees and contractors and improving product placement displays. These programs could require a substantial investment while providing no assurance of return or incremental revenue. The Company financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens, if resellers stopped distributing the Company products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company products. 14 The Company Retail business has required and will continue to require a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. The Company retail stores have required substantial fixed investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory and personnel. The Company also has entered into substantial operating lease commitments for retail space. Certain stores have been designed and built to serve as high profile venues to promote brand awareness and serve as vehicles for corporate sales and marketing activities. Because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment than the Company more typical retail stores. Due to the high fixed cost structure associated with the Retail segment, a decline in sales or the closure or poor performance of individual or multiple stores could result in significant lease termination costs, write offs of equipment and leasehold improvements, and severance costs that could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. Many factors unique to retail operations, some of which are beyond the Company control, pose risks and uncertainties that could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, macro economic factors that could have a negative effect on general retail activity, as well as the Company inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation, inability to sell third party products at adequate margins, failure to manage relationships with its existing retail channel partners, more challenging environment in managing retail operations outside the U.S., costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of retail inventory, and inability to obtain and renew leases in quality retail locations at a reasonable cost. Investment in new business strategies and initiatives could disrupt the Company ongoing business and present risks not originally contemplated. The Company has invested, and in the future may invest, in new business strategies or acquisitions. Such endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including distraction of management from current operations, insufficient revenue to offset liabilities assumed and expenses associated with the strategy, inadequate return of capital, and unidentified issues not discovered in the Company due diligence. These new ventures are inherently risky and may not be successful. They may materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company products and services experience quality problems from time to time that can result in decreased sales and operating margin. The Company sells complex hardware and software products and services that can contain design and manufacturing defects. Sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as those sold by the Company, often contain bugs that can unexpectedly interfere with the software intended operation. The Company online services may from time to time experience outages, service slowdowns, or errors. Defects may also occur in comp1nts and products the Company purchases from third parties. There can be no assurance the Company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware, software and services it sells. Failure to do so could result in lost revenue, harm to reputation, and significant warranty and other expenses, and could have a material adverse impact on the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company is subject to laws and regulations worldwide, changes to which could increase the Company costs and individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect the Company financial condition or operating results. The Company is subject to laws and regulations affecting its domestic and international operations in a number of areas. These U.S. and foreign laws and regulations affect the Company activities including, but not limited to, areas of labor, advertising, content, consumer protection, real estate, billing, e commerce, promotions, quality of services, telecommunications, mobile, television, intellectual property ownership and infringement, tax, 15 import and export requirements, anti corruption, foreign exchange controls and cash repatriation restrictions, data privacy requirements, anti competition, environmental, health, and safety. By way of example, laws and regulations related to mobile communications and media devices in the many jurisdictions in which the Company operates are extensive and subject to change. Such changes could include, among others, restrictions on the production, manufacture, distribution, and use of the device, locking the device to a carrier ne2rk, or mandating the use of the device on more than 1 carrier ne2rk. These devices are also subject to certification and regulation by governmental and standardization bodies, as well as by cellular ne2rk carriers for use on their ne2rks. These certification processes are extensive and time consuming, and could result in additional testing requirements, product modifications, delays in product shipment dates, or preclude the Company from selling certain products. Compliance with these laws, regulations and similar requirements may be 1rous and expensive, and they may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, further increasing the cost of compliance. This increases the costs of doing business, and any such costs, which may rise in the future as a result of changes in these laws and regulations or in their interpretation could individually or in the aggregate make the Company products and services less attractive to the Company customers, delay the introduction of new products in 1 or more regions, cause the Company to change or limit its business practices, or affect the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company has implemented policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with these laws and regulations, but there can be no assurance that the Company employees, contractors, or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or the Company policies. Any such violations could individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect the Company financial condition or operating results. The Company success depends largely on the continued service and availability of key personnel. Much of the Company future success depends on the continued availability and service of key personnel, including its CEO, its executive team and highly skilled employees. Experienced personnel in the technology industry are in high demand and competition for their talents is intense, especially in the Silicon Valley, where most of the Company key personnel are located. Political events, war, terrorism, public health issues, natural disasters and other circumstances could materially adversely affect the Company. War, terrorism, geopolitical uncertainties, public health issues, and other business interruptions have caused and could cause damage or disruption to international commerce and the global economy, and thus could have a strong negative effect on the Company, its suppliers, logistics providers, manufacturing vendors and customers, including channel partners. The Company business operations are subject to interruption by natural disasters, fire, power shortages, nuclear power plant accidents, terrorist attacks, and other hostile acts, labor disputes, public health issues, and other events beyond its control. Such events could decrease demand for the Company products, make it difficult or impossible for the Company to make and deliver products to its customers, including channel partners, or to receive comp1nts from its suppliers, and create delays and inefficiencies in the Company supply chain. Should major public health issues, including pandemics, arise, the Company could be negatively affected by more stringent employee travel restrictions, additional limitations in freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of products between regions, delays in production ramps of new products, and disruptions in the operations of the Company manufacturing vendors and comp1nt suppliers. The majority of the Company research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology systems, and other critical business operations, including certain comp1nt suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are in locations that could be affected by natural disasters. In the event of a natural disaster, losses, significant recovery time and substantial expenditures could be required to resume operations and the Company financial condition and operating results could be materially adversely affected. 16 Please also refer to the discussion of risks related to the March 11, 2011, Japan earthquake and tsunami and the recent flooding in Thailand in I, Item 7, Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, under the subheading Japan Earthquake and Tsunami and Thailand Flooding, which is incorporated herein by reference. The Company may be subject to information technology system failures or ne2rk disruptions that could damage the Company reputation, business operations, and financial conditions. The Company may be subject to information technology system failures and ne2rk disruptions. These may be caused by natural disasters, accidents, power disruptions, telecommunications failures, acts of terrorism or war, computer viruses, physical or electronic break ins, or similar events or disruptions. System redundancy may be ineffective or inadequate, and the Company disaster recovery planning may not be sufficient for all eventualities. Such failures or disruptions could prevent access to the Company online stores and services, preclude retail store transactions, compromise Company or customer data, and result in delayed or cancelled orders. System failures and disruptions could also impede the manufacturing and shipping of products, delivery of online services, transactions processing and financial reporting. The Company may be subject to breaches of its information technology systems, which could damage the Company reputation, business partner and customer relationships, and access to online stores and services. Such breaches could subject the Company to significant reputational, financial, legal, and operational consequences. The Company business requires it to use and store customer, employee, and business partner personally identifiable information ( PII ). This may include names, addresses, ph1 numbers, email addresses, contact preferences, tax identification numbers, and payment account information. Although malicious attacks to gain access to PII affect many companies across various industries, the Company may be at a relatively greater risk of being targeted because of its high profile and the amount of PII managed. The Company requires user names and passwords in order to access its information technology systems. The Company also uses encryption and authentication technologies to secure the transmission and storage of data. These security measures may be compromised as a result of third party security breaches, employee error, malfeasance, faulty password management, or other irregularity, and result in persons obtaining unauthorized access to Company data or accounts. Third parties may attempt to fraudulently induce employees or customers into disclosing user names, passwords or other sensitive information, which may in turn be used to access the Company information technology systems. To help protect customers and the Company, the Company monitors accounts and systems for unusual activity and may freeze accounts under suspicious circumstances, which may result in the delay or loss of customer orders. The Company devotes significant resources to ne2rk security, data encryption, and other security measures to protect its systems and data, but these security measures cannot provide absolute security. The Company may experience a breach of its systems and may be unable to protect sensitive data. Moreover, if a computer security breach affects the Company systems or results in the unauthorized release of PII, the Company reputation and brand could be materially damaged and use of the Company products and services could decrease. The Company would also be exposed to a risk of loss or litigation and possible liability, which could result in a material adverse effect on the Company business, results of operations and financial condition. The Company business is subject to a variety of U.S. and international laws, rules, policies and other obligations regarding data protection. The Company is subject to federal, state and international laws relating to the collection, use, retention, security and transfer of PII. In many cases, these laws apply not only to third party transactions, but also to transfers of information between the Company and its subsidiaries, and among the Company, its subsidiaries and other parties with which the Company has commercial relations. Several jurisdictions have passed new laws in this 17 area, and other jurisdictions are considering imposing additional restrictions. These laws continue to develop and may be inconsistent from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Complying with emerging and changing international requirements may cause the Company to incur substantial costs or require the Company to change its business practices. Noncompliance could result in penalties or significant legal liability. The Company privacy policies and practices concerning the use and disclosure of data are posted on its website. Any failure by the Company, its suppliers or other parties with whom the Company does business to comply with its posted privacy policies or with other federal, state or international privacy related or data protection laws and regulations could result in proceedings against the Company by governmental entities or others, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company business, results of operations and financial condition. The Company is also subject to payment card association rules and obligations under its contracts with payment card processors. Under these rules and obligations, if information is compromised, the Company could be liable to payment card issuers for the cost of associated expenses and penalties. In addition, if the Company fails to follow payment card industry security standards, even if no customer information is compromised, the Company could incur significant fines or experience a significant increase in payment card transaction costs. The Company expects its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate. The Company profit margins vary among its products and its distribution channels. The Company software, accessories, and service and support contracts generally have higher gross margins than certain of the Company other products. Gross margins on the Company hardware products vary across product lines and can change over time as a result of product transitions, pricing and configuration changes, and comp1nt, warranty, and other cost fluctuations. The Company direct sales generally have higher associated gross margins than its indirect sales through its channel partners. In addition, the Company gross margin and operating margin percentages, as well as overall profitability, may be materially adversely impacted as a result of a shift in product, geographic or channel mix, new products, comp1nt cost increases, strengthening U.S. dollar, or price competition. The Company has typically experienced greater net sales in the first fiscal quarter compared to other fiscal quarters due to increased holiday seasonal demand. Furthermore, the Company sells more products from time to time during the third month of a quarter than it does during either of the first 2 months. Developments late in a quarter, such as lower than anticipated demand for the Company products, issues with new product introductions, an internal systems failure, or failure of 1 of the Company logistics, comp1nts supply, or manufacturing partners, could have a material adverse impact on the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company stock price is subject to volatility. The Company stock continues to experience substantial price volatility. Additionally, the stock market as a whole has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the stock price of many technology companies in ways that may have been unrelated to these companies operating performance. The Company believes its stock price reflects high future growth and profitability expectations. If the Company fails to meet these expectations its stock price may significantly decline, which could have a material adverse impact on investor confidence and employee retention. The Company business is subject to the risks of international operations. The Company derives a significant portion of its revenue and earnings from its international operations. Compliance with applicable U.S. and foreign laws and regulations, such as import and export requirements, anti corruption laws, tax laws, foreign exchange controls and cash repatriation restrictions, data privacy requirements, environmental laws, labor laws, and anti competition regulations, increases the costs of doing business in foreign jurisdictions. Although the Company has implemented policies and procedures to comply with these laws and 18 regulations, a violation by the Company employees, contractors, or agents could nevertheless occur. The consequences of such violations could individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect the Company financial condition or operating results. The Company financial condition and operating results also could be significantly affected by other risks associated with international activities including, but not limited to, economic and labor conditions, increased duties, taxes and other costs, political instability, and changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus local currencies. Margins on sales of the Company products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include comp1nts obtained from foreign suppliers, could be materially adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including duties, tariffs and antidumping penalties. The Company is also exposed to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables with customers in certain international markets. There can be no assurance it can effectively limit its credit risk and avoid losses, which could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to non U.S. dollar denominated sales and operating expenses worldwide. Weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will adversely affect the U.S. dollar value of the Company foreign currency denominated sales and earnings, and generally will lead the Company to raise international pricing, potentially reducing demand for the Company products. In some circumstances, due to competition or other reasons, the Company may decide not to raise local prices to the full extent of the dollar strengthening, or at all, which would adversely affect the U.S. dollar value of the Company foreign currency denominated sales and earnings. Conversely, a strengthening of foreign currencies, while generally beneficial to the Company foreign currency denominated sales and earnings, could cause the Company to reduce international pricing and incur losses on its foreign currency derivative instruments, thereby limiting the benefit. Additionally, strengthening of foreign currencies may also increase the Company cost of product comp1nts denominated in those currencies, thus adversely affecting gross margins. The Company has used derivative instruments, such as foreign currency forward and option contracts, to hedge certain exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. The use of such hedging activities may not offset any or more than a portion of the adverse financial effects of unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates over the limited time the hedges are in place. The Company is exposed to credit risk and fluctuations in the market values of its investment portfolio. Although the Company has not recognized any significant losses to date on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, any significant declines in their market values could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. Given the global nature of its business, the Company has both domestic and international investments. Credit ratings and pricing of these investments can be negatively affected by liquidity, credit deterioration, financial results, economic risk, political risk, sovereign risk or other factors. As a result, the value and liquidity of the Company cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities could decline and result in a significant impairment, which could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. The Company is exposed to credit risk on its trade accounts receivable, vendor non trade receivables and prepayments related to long term supply agreements. This risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen. The Company distributes its products through third party cellular ne2rk carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value added resellers. A substantial majority of the Company outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance. The Company exposure to credit and collectability risk on its trade receivables is higher in certain international markets and its ability to mitigate such risks may be limited. Cellular ne2rk carriers accounted for a significant portion of the Company trade receivables as of September 24, 2011 The 19 Company also has unsecured vendor non trade receivables resulting from purchases of comp1nts by outsourcing partners and other vendors that manufacture sub assemblies or assemble final products for the Company. 2 vendors accounted for a significant portion of the Company non trade receivables as of September 24, 2011 In addition, the Company has made prepayments associated with long term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory comp1nts. While the Company has procedures to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on its trade and vendor non trade receivables as well as long term prepayments, there can be no assurance such procedures will effectively limit its credit risk and avoid losses, which could materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. Unfavorable results of legal proceedings could materially adversely affect the Company. The Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that have not yet been fully resolved and that have arisen in the ordinary conduct of business, and additional claims may arise in the future. Results of legal proceedings are subject to significant uncertainty and, regardless of the merit of the claims, litigation may be expensive, time consuming, disruptive to the Company operations, and distracting to management. In recognition of these considerations, the Company may enter into arrangements to settle litigation. Although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if 1 or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of management expectations, the Company consolidated financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Further, such an outcome could result in significant compensatory, punitive or trebled m1tary damages, disgorgement of revenue or profits, remedial corporate measures or injunctive relief against the Company that could materially adversely affect its financial condition and operating results. Changes in the Company tax rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international tax legislation or exposure to additional tax liabilities could affect its future results. The Company is subject to taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. The Company future effective tax rates could be affected by changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, or changes in tax laws or their interpretation. Any of these changes could have a material adverse effect on the Company profitability. The Company is also subject to the continual examination of its income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. The Company regularly assesses the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of its provision for taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these examinations will not materially adversely affect the Company financial condition and operating results. Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments N1 Item 2 Item 2 Properties 
