CIK: 313927
Company Name: CHURCH DWIGHT CO INC DE 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2013-02-22
Accession Number: 0001193125-13-071188


ITEM 1 BUSINESS GENERAL The Company, founded in 1846, develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of household, personal care and specialty products. The Company sells its consumer products under a variety of brands through a broad distribution platform that includes supermarkets, mass merchandisers, wholesale clubs, drugstores, convenience stores, dollar, pet and other specialty stores and websites, all of which sell the products to consumers. The Company also sells specialty products to industrial customers and distributors. The Company focuses its consumer products marketing efforts principally on its eight power brands. These well recognized brand names include ARM & HAMMER (used in multiple product categories such as baking soda, cat litter, carpet deodorization and laundry detergent), TROJAN condoms, XTRA laundry detergent, OXICLEAN stain removers and cleaning solutions, NAIR depilatories, FIRST RESPONSE home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ORAJEL oral analgesics and SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes. The Company business is divided into 3 primary segments Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products Division ( SPD ). The Consumer Domestic segment includes the eight power brands and other household and personal care products such as SCRUB FREE, KABOOM and ORANGE GLO cleaning products, ANSWER home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ARRID antiperspirant, CLOSE UP and AIM toothpastes and L IL CRITTERS and VITAFUSION dietary supplements. The Consumer International segment primarily sells a variety of personal care products, some of which use the same brands as our domestic product lines, in international markets, including Canada, France, Australia, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Brazil and China. The SPD segment is the largest U.S. producer of sodium bicarbonate, which it sells together with other specialty inorganic chemicals for a variety of industrial, institutional, medical and food applications. This segment also sells a range of animal nutrition and specialty cleaning products. In 2012, the Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD segments represented approximately 74%, 17% and 9%, respectively, of the Company net sales. All domestic brand rankings contained in this Annual Report are based on dollar share rankings from ACNielsen Food Drug Mass Merchandise (excluding Wal Mart) for the 52 weeks ending December 22, 2012 Foreign brand rankings are derived from several sources. 2012 DEVELOPMENTS Avid Health Acquisition On October 1, 2012, the Company acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Avid Health, Inc. ( Avid Health ). Avid Health is a leader in the dietary supplement category that includes vitamins and minerals. Its products, among others, include L IL CRITTERS children gummy form dietary supplements and VITAFUSION adult gummy form dietary supplements. The total purchase price was approximately $650 million, which is subject to adjustment based on the closing working capital of Avid Health and its subsidiaries. The Company financed the acquisition with a combination of proceeds from an underwritten public offering of $400 million aggregate principal amount of 2875% Senior Notes due 2022, the issuance of commercial paper and cash. Avid Health annual sales for the twelve months ended June 2012 were approximately $230 million. These dietary supplement brands will be managed principally within the Consumer Domestic segment. Share Repurchase Authorization On October 31, 2012, the Company Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program, under which the Company may purchase up to an additional $300 million of the Company common stock. Under the new program, shares may be repurchased from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated 1 Table of Contents transactions or otherwise, subject to market conditions, and corporate and legal requirements. There is no expiration date on the stock repurchase authorization and the Company is not obligated to acquire any specific number of shares. The previous share repurchase program announced in August 2011 had an authorization of $300 million, $20 million of which remained available on October 31, 2012 In 2012, the Company purchased approximately 5 million shares at an aggregate cost of approximately $250 million under both programs. As of December 31, 2012, the Company had used the full $300 million authorized under the August 2011 program, and had $270 million remaining available for use under the October 2012 program. In January 2013, the Company purchased an additional 0.9 million shares at an aggregate cost of approximately $50 million. As of the filing date of this Annual Report, the Company has made no additional purchases in 2013, and has approximately $220 million remaining for use in the repurchase of the Company shares. New Corporate Office Building On July 20, 2011, the Company entered into a 20 year lease for a new corporate headquarters building constructed in Ewing, New Jersey (approximately 10 miles from the Company former corporate headquarters in Princeton, New Jersey) to meet office space needs for the foreseeable future. The Company began occupancy in late 2012 and as a result, the lease will expire in 2032 The Company lease commitment is approximately $116 million over the lease term. Based on certain clauses in the lease, the Company is considered the owner for financial statement reporting purposes, and recorded approximately $50 million as of December 31, 2012 in building assets and a corresponding amount in other long term liabilities. FINANCIAL INFORMATION ABOUT SEGMENTS As noted above, the Company business is organized into 3 reportable segments Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD. These segments are based on differences in the nature of products and organizational and ownership structures. The businesses of these segments generally are not seasonal, although the Consumer Domestic and Consumer International segments are affected by sales of SPINBRUSH and ARM & HAMMER battery operated toothbrushes (which typically are higher during the fall, in advance of the holiday season), sales of NAIR depilatories and waxes (which typically are higher in the spring and summer months), and sales of VITAFUSION and L IL CRITTERS dietary supplements (which typically are slightly higher in the fourth quarter of each year, in advance of the cold and flu season and renewed commitments to health). Information concerning the net sales, operating income and identifiable assets of each of the segments is set forth in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report and in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, which is Item 7 of this Annual Report. 2 Table of Contents CONSUMER PRODUCTS Consumer Domestic Principal Products The Company founders first marketed baking soda in 1846 for use in home baking. Today, this product has a wide variety of uses in the home, including as a refrigerator and freezer deodorizer, scratch free cleaner and deodorizer for kitchen surfaces and cooking appliances, bath additive, dentifrice, cat litter deodorizer and swimming pool pH stabilizer. The Company specializes in baking soda based products, as well as other products which use the same raw materials or technology or are sold in the same markets. In addition, this segment includes other deodorizing and household cleaning products, as well as laundry and personal care products. The following table sets forth the principal products of the Company Consumer Domestic segment. Type of Product Key Brand Names Household ARM & HAMMER Baking Soda ARM & HAMMER Carpet Deodorizers ARM & HAMMER Cat Litter Deodorizer ARM & HAMMER Clumping Cat Litters ARM & HAMMER Powder, Liquid and Unit Dose Laundry Detergents ARM & HAMMER Super Washing Soda ARM & HAMMER FRESH N SOFT Fabric Softeners ARM & HAMMER TOTAL 2 in 1 Dryer Cloths CAMEO Aluminum and Stainless Steel Cleaner CLEAN SHOWER Daily Shower Cleaner DELICARE Fine Fabric Wash FELINE PINE Cat Litter KABOOM Cleaning Products NICE N FLUFFY Fabric Softeners ORANGE GLO Cleaning Products OXICLEAN Dishwashing Booster OXICLEAN Laundry and Cleaning Solutions SCRUB FREE Bathroom Cleaners SNO BOL Toilet Bowl Cleaner XTRA Fabric Softeners XTRA Powder and Liquid Laundry Detergents Personal Care AIM Toothpaste ANSWER Home Pregnancy and Ovulation Test Kits ARM & HAMMER Deodorants and Antiperspirants ARM & HAMMER Toothpastes ARM & HAMMER TOOTH TUNES Toothbrushes ARRID Antiperspirants BATISTE Dry Shampoo CARTERS LITTLE PILLS Laxative CLOSE UP Toothpaste FIRST RESPONSE Home Pregnancy and Ovulation Test Kits LADY S CHOICE Antiperspirants L IL CRITTERS Dietary Supplements MENTADENT Toothpaste and Toothbrushes NAIR Depilatories, Lotions, Creams and Waxes ORAJEL Oral Analgesics PEPSODENT Toothpaste SIMPLY SALINE Nasal Saline Moisturizer SPINBRUSH Battery operated Toothbrushes TROJAN Condoms and Vibrating Products VITAFUSION Dietary Supplements 3 Table of Contents Household Products In 2012, household products constituted approximately 65% of the Company Domestic Consumer sales and approximately 48% of the Company total sales. The ARM & HAMMER trademark was adopted in 1867. ARM & HAMMER Baking Soda remains the leading brand of baking soda in terms of consumer recognition of the brand name and reputation for quality and value. The deodorizing properties of baking soda have led to the development of several household products. For example, the Company markets ARM & HAMMER FRIDGE FRESH, a refrigerator deodorizer equipped with a baking soda filter to help keep food tasting fresher. In addition, ARM & HAMMER Carpet Deodorizer is the number 1 brand in the domestic carpet deodorizer market. The Company laundry detergents constitute its largest consumer business, measured by net sales. The Company markets its ARM & HAMMER brand laundry detergents in powder, liquid and unit dose forms, as value products, priced at a discount from products identified by the Company as market leaders. The Company markets its XTRA laundry detergent in both powder and liquid forms at a slightly lower price than ARM & HAMMER brand laundry detergents. The Company also markets XTRA LASTING SCENTSATIONS, XTRA FRESCO SCENTSATIONS and XTRA FRESH SCENTSATIONS, a line of highly fragranced and concentrated liquid laundry detergents, and OXICLEAN laundry stain fighting additives. OXICLEAN is the number 1 brand in the laundry stain fighting additive market in the U.S. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER PLUS OXICLEAN liquid and powder laundry detergents, combining the benefits of these 2 powerful laundry detergent products. In 2012, the Company launched its ARM & HAMMER CRYSTAL BURST and ARM & HAMMER TOSS N D1 unit dose laundry detergents. In 2013, the Company will launch ARM & HAMMER Ultra Power, a 4X concentrated liquid laundry detergent, and 2 new fragrances within its XTRA line Warm Vanilla Comfort and Rain Lily and Aloe. The Company laundry products also include fabric softener sheets that prevent static cling and soften and freshen clothes. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER FRESH N SOFT fabric softeners and offers a liquid fabric softener, NICE N FLUFFY, at a slightly lower price enabling the Company to compete at several price points. The Company markets ARM & HAMMER TOTAL 2 in 1 Dryer Cloths, a fabric softener sheet used in the clothes dryer that delivers liquid like softening, freshening and static control. The Company also markets a line of cat litter products, including ARM & HAMMER Super Scoop clumping cat litter. Line extensions of Super Scoop include ARM & HAMMER Multi Cat cat litter, designed for households with more than 1 cat, ARM & HAMMER Odor Alert cat litter, with crystals that change color when activated, ARM & HAMMER ESSENTIALS clumping cat litter, a corn based scoopable litter made for consumers who prefer to use products made with natural ingredients, and ARM & HAMMER Double Duty cat litter, which eliminates both urine and feces odors on contact. FELINE PINE cat litter continues to be the number 1 brand in the natural litter segment, which is the highest growth segment in the litter category. This brand complements the Company existing cat litter business and positions the Company as the leading supplier of natural cat litter. In 2012, the Company launched ARM & HAMMER ULTRA LAST, a longer lasting clumping cat litter. In addition, the Company markets a line of household cleaning products including CLEAN SHOWER daily shower cleaner, and SCRUB FREE bathroom cleaners. The Company also markets KABOOM bathroom cleaners and ORANGE GLO household cleaning products. In 2012, the Company launched OXICLEAN Dishwashing Booster, which removes cloudy film and food particles on glasses and dishes. Personal Care Products The Company personal care business uses the unique strengths of its ARM & HAMMER trademark and baking soda technology, and the Company has expanded its presence through its acquisition of antiperspirants, 4 Table of Contents oral care products, depilatories, reproductive health products, oral analgesics, nasal saline moisturizers and dietary supplements under a variety of other leading brand names. In 2012, Personal Care Products constituted approximately 35% of the Company Consumer Domestic sales and approximately 26% of the Company total sales. ARM & HAMMER Baking Soda, when used as a dentifrice, helps whiten and polish teeth, removes plaque and leaves the mouth feeling fresh and clean. These properties led to the development of a complete line of sodium bicarbonate based dentifrice products which are marketed and sold nationally primarily under the ARM & HAMMER DENTAL CARE and ARM & HAMMER ADVANCE WHITE brand names. In 2012, the Company launched a line of toothpaste for sensitive teeth under the ARM & HAMMER brand. The Company also manufactures in the United States (the U.S. ) and markets in the U.S. (including Puerto Rico) and Canada, CLOSE UP, PEPSODENT and AIM toothpastes, which are priced at a discount from the market leaders, and the MENTADENT brand of toothpaste and toothbrushes. The Company markets ORAJEL oral analgesics, which includes products for adults as well as babies, including ORAJEL Cooling Cucumber Teething Gel and BABY ORAJEL Tooth and Gum Cleanser. In 2013, the Company will launch a single dose cold sore product under the ORAJEL brand. The Company markets SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes in the U.S. (including Puerto Rico), the United Kingdom, Canada, China and Australia. In 2012, the SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrush was a leading brand of battery operated toothbrushes in the U.S. The Company also markets SPINBRUSH PROCLEAN toothbrushes, a 2 speed version of the product, SPINBRUSH PROCLEAN RECHARGE, a rechargeable toothbrush offering up to 1 week of power brushes between charges and SPINBRUSH PROCLEAN Sonic, a reasonably priced high speed battery operated toothbrush which competes with much more expensive sonic toothbrushes. In 2012, the Company launched ARM & HAMMER TOOTH TUNES battery operated toothbrushes, with proprietary technology that delivers music while brushing. In 2013, the Company will launch additional song offerings under its TOOTH TUNES brand, including songs by the band 1 Direction. The Company deodorant and antiperspirant products are marketed under the ARM & HAMMER, ARRID and LADY S CHOICE brand names. Condoms are recognized as highly reliable contraceptives as well as an effective means of reducing the risk of sexually transmitted diseases. The Company TROJAN condom brand has been in use for more than 90 years, and includes such products as ECSTASY, TROJAN EXTENDED PLEASURE, HER PLEASURE, TWISTED PLEASURE, SHARED PLEASURE, MAGNUM and FIRE & ICE. In 2012, the brand continued its market and innovation leadership in the U.S. with the new TROJAN CHARGED condom with a sensate lubricant that has heating, cooling and tingling properties, and TROJAN Vibrations MIDNIGHT COLLECTION, a new line of vibrating products. In 2013, the Company intends to launch a new line of lubrication products under the TROJAN brand, and TROJAN PURE ECSTASY condoms. In 2012, the Company FIRST RESPONSE brand continued to be the number 1 selling brand in the home pregnancy and ovulation test kit business category. The Company also markets ANSWER, which competes in the value segment of the home pregnancy and ovulation test kit market. The Company also markets a home female fertility test under the FIRST RESPONSE brand name. The Company NAIR depilatory brand is the number 1 selling depilatory brand in the U.S., with innovative products that address consumer needs for quick, complete and longer lasting hair removal. The Company offers a full array of depilatory products for women, men and teens under the NAIR brand name, including Cool Gel, Shower Power, Roll On, and Milk N H1y. In 2012, the Company launched its NAIR Brazilian Spa Clay products for both depilatory and wax, and in 2013 the Company will add to this line with its NAIR TOTAL CARE body and face trios. 5 Table of Contents The Company markets the SIMPLY SALINE brand of nasal saline moisturizers in the U.S,, complementing the Company existing STERIMAR brand nasal saline solution business in Europe and other parts of the world. In addition, in 2012, the Company began to market BATISTE dry shampoo in the U.S. As a result of the Company acquisition of Avid Health in 2012, the Company now markets and sells, among others, the L IL CRITTERS children gummy dietary supplement line and the VITAFUSION adult gummy dietary supplement line, both leading brands in the gummy form dietary supplement category. Consumer International The Consumer International segment markets a variety of personal care products, household and over the counter products in international markets, including Canada, France, Australia, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Brazil and China. Total Consumer International net sales represented approximately 17% of the Company consolidated net sales in 2012 Net sales of the subsidiaries located in Canada, France, the United Kingdom and Australia accounted for 37%, 15%, 18% and 12%, respectively, of the Company 2012 international net sales in this segment. No other country in which the Company operates accounts for more than 10% of its total international net sales, and no product line accounts for more than 15% of total international net sales. Certain of the Company international product lines are similar to its domestic product lines. For example, the Company markets home pregnancy and ovulation test kits and oral care products in most of its international markets, waxes and depilatory products in virtually all international locations, TROJAN condoms in Canada and Mexico and L IL CRITTERS and VITAFUSION dietary supplements principally in Canada and Asia. The Company has expanded distribution of ARM & HAMMER products internationally by marketing ARM & HAMMER laundry and pet care products in Canada and ARM & HAMMER laundry care products in Mexico. The Company also markets SPINBRUSH battery operated toothbrushes internationally, primarily in the United Kingdom, Canada, France, China and Australia, and OXICLEAN and ORANGE GLO products internationally, primarily in Mexico and Canada. The Company sells PEARL DROPS dentifrice products in Europe, Canada and Australia and STERIMAR nasal hygiene products in a number of markets in Europe, Latin America, China and Australia. The Company also sells BATISTE dry shampoo principally in the United Kingdom, with distributors selling into Australia, and 2012 launches in Brazil and Mexico. COMPETITION FOR CONSUMER DOMESTIC AND CONSUMER INTERNATIONAL The Company competes in the household and personal care consumer product categories, which are highly innovative categories, characterized by a continuous flow of new products and line extensions, and requiring significant advertising and promotion. The Company competes in these categories primarily on the basis of product innovation and performance, brand recognition, price, value and other consumer benefits. Consumer products, particularly those that are value priced, such as laundry and household cleaning products, as well as certain toothpaste products, are subject to significant price competition. As a result, the Company from time to time may need to reduce the prices for some of its products to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. Internationally, the Company products compete in similar competitive categories for most of its products. Many of the Company competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, The Sun Products Corporation, The Clorox Company, Colgate Palmolive Company, S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., Henkel AG & Co. KGaA, Reckitt Benckiser Group plc, Johnson & Johnson, Ansell Limited, Pfizer Inc., Bayer AG and Alere Inc. Many of these companies have greater financial resources than the Company and have the capacity to outspend the Company if they attempt to gain market share. 6 Table of Contents Product introductions typically involve heavy marketing costs in the year of launch, and the Company usually is not able to determine whether the new products and line extensions will be successful until a period of time has elapsed following the introduction of the new products or the extension of the product line. Because of the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from customers, particularly high volume retailer store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. These concessions or terms could reduce the Company margins. Furthermore, if the Company is unable to maintain price or trade terms acceptable to its customers, they could increase product purchases from competitors and reduce purchases from the Company, which would harm the Company sales and profitability. DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER DOMESTIC Products in the Consumer Domestic segment are marketed throughout the U.S. primarily through a broad distribution platform that includes supermarkets, mass merchandisers, wholesale clubs, drugstores, convenience stores, dollar, pet and other specialty stores, and websites, all of which sell the products to consumers. The Company employs a sales force based regionally throughout the U.S. that utilizes the services of independent food brokers, who represent our products in the Food, Pet, Dollar and Club classes of trade. The Company products are stored in Company plants and third party owned warehouses and are either delivered by independent trucking companies or picked up by customers at the Company facilities. DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER INTERNATIONAL Products in the Consumer International segment are marketed primarily through a broad distribution platform that includes supermarkets, wholesale clubs, pharmacies and drugstores, convenience stores and discount stores. The Company Consumer International distribution ne2rk reflects capacity and cost considerations in the regions served. In Canada, Mexico and Australia, finished goods are warehoused internally and shipped directly to customers through independent freight carriers. In the United Kingdom, domestic product distribution is subcontracted to professional distribution companies, while export product distribution is handled internally and shipped from the Company warehouses. In France, distribution of consumer products to mass markets is handled internally while distribution of the Company over the counter products to pharmacies and professional diagnostics to laboratories is handled by outside agencies. In Brazil and China, all product distribution is subcontracted to professional distribution companies. 7 Table of Contents Specialty Products Division ( SPD ) Principal Products The Company SPD segment focuses on sales to businesses and participates in 3 product areas Specialty Chemicals, Animal Nutrition and Specialty Cleaners. The following table sets forth the principal products of the Company SPD segment. Type of Product Key Brand Names Specialty Chemicals ARM & HAMMER Performance Grade Sodium Bicarbonate ARMAND PRODUCTS COMPANY Potassium Carbonate and Potassium Bicarbonate (1) Enprove Ground Trona (2) Enprove Sodium Bicarbonate (2) Animal Nutrition ARM & HAMMER Feed Grade Sodium Bicarbonate BIO CHLOR and FERMENTEN Rumen Fermentation Enhancers DCAD PLUS Feed Grade Potassium Carbonate (3) Megalac Rumen Bypass Fat (4) Megalac R Omega 3 & Omega 6 Essential Fatty Acids (4) MEGAMINE L, Rumen Bypass Lysine SQ 810 Natural Sodium Sesquicarbonate Specialty Cleaners ARMAKLEEN Commercial & Professional Aqueous Cleaners (5) ARMEX Blast Media (5) Commercial & Professional Cleaners and Deodorizers (1) Manufactured and marketed by Armand Products Company, a joint venture in which the Company holds a 50% interest. (2) Distributed and marketed by Natronx Technologies, LLC ( Natronx ), a joint venture in which the Company holds a 1 third ownership interest. Enprove is a registered trademark of FMC Corporation ( FMC ) that has been assigned to Natronx with the right of reversion to FMC upon a Natronx dissolution. (3) Manufactured for the Company by Armand Products Company. (4) Megalac is a registered trademark of Volac International Limited. (5) Distributed in North America by The ArmaKleen Company, a joint venture in which the Company holds a 50% ownership interest. Specialty Chemicals The Company specialty chemicals business primarily encompasses the manufacture, marketing and sale of sodium bicarbonate in a range of grades and granulations for use in industrial markets. In industrial markets, sodium bicarbonate is used by other manufacturing companies as a leavening agent for commercial baked goods, as an antacid in pharmaceuticals, as a carbon dioxide release agent in fire extinguishers, as an alkaline agent in swimming pool chemicals, and as a buffer in kidney dialysis. The Company 99.8% owned Brazilian subsidiary, Quimica Geral do Nordeste ( QGN ), is South America leading provider of sodium bicarbonate. The business, which has annual revenues of approximately $40 million, markets sodium bicarbonate, dairy products and other chemicals in Brazil. The Company is in continued discussions for the sale of this business, and as such has classified the business as an asset held for sale . The Company and Occidental Chemical Corporation are equal partners in a joint venture, Armand Products Company, which manufactures and markets potassium carbonate and potassium bicarbonate for sale in domestic and international markets. The potassium based products are used in a wide variety of applications, including agricultural products, specialty glass and ceramics, and potassium silicates. Armand Products Company also manufactures for the Company a potassium carbonate based animal feed additive for sale in the dairy industry, described below under Animal Nutrition Products. 8 Table of Contents The Company, FMC Corporation and TATA Chemicals (Soda Ash) Partners are equal partners in Natronx. The Company investment is accounted for under the equity method. Natronx engages in the marketing and distribution of sodium based, dry sorbents for air pollution control in electric utility and industrial boiler operations. The sorbents, primarily sodium bicarbonate and trona, are used by coal fired utilities to remove harmful pollutants, such as acid gases, in flue gas treatment processes. Animal Nutrition Products A special grade of sodium bicarbonate, as well as sodium sesquicarbonate, is sold to the animal feed market as a feed additive for use by the dairy industry as a buffer, or antacid, for dairy cattle. The Company also markets DCAD PLUS feed grade potassium carbonate, which is manufactured by Armand Products Company as a feed additive into the animal feed market. The Company markets MEGALAC rumen bypass fat, a nutritional supplement made from natural oils, which enables cows to maintain energy levels during the period of high milk production, resulting in improved milk yields and minimized weight loss. The product and the trademark MEGALAC are licensed under a long term license agreement from a British company, Volac International Limited. The Company also markets BIO CHLOR and FERMENTEN, a range of specialty feed ingredients for dairy cows, which improve rumen feed efficiency and help increase milk production. Specialty Cleaners The Company also provides a line of cleaning and deodorizing products for use in commercial and industrial applications such as office buildings, hotels, restaurants and other facilities. The Company and Safety Kleen Systems, Inc. ( Safety Kleen ) are equal partners in a joint venture, The ArmaKleen Company, which was formed to build a specialty cleaning products business based on the Company technology and Safety Kleen sales and distribution organization. In North America, this joint venture distributes the Company proprietary product line of aqueous cleaners along with the Company ARMEX blast media line, which is designed for the removal of a wide variety of surface coatings. The Company continues to pursue opportunities to build this industrial cleaning business using the Company aqueous based technology as well as the ARMEX blast media line of products. COMPETITION FOR SPD Competition within the specialty chemicals and animal nutrition product lines is intense. The specialty chemicals business operates in a competitive environment influenced by capacity utilization, customers leverage and the impact of raw material and energy costs. Product introductions typically involve introductory costs in the year of launch, and the Company usually is not able to determine whether new products and line extensions will be successful until sometime following the introduction of new products or the extension of the product lines. The Company key competitors are Solvay Chemicals, Inc., FMC Corporation and Natural Soda, Inc. DISTRIBUTION FOR SPD SPD markets sodium bicarbonate and other chemicals to industrial and agricultural customers primarily throughout the U.S. and Canada. Distribution is accomplished through a dedicated sales force supplemented by manufacturer representatives and the sales personnel of independent distributors throughout the country. The Company products in this segment are located in Company plants and public warehouses and are either delivered by independent trucking companies or picked up by customers at the Company facilities. 9 Table of Contents RAW MATERIALS AND SOURCES OF SUPPLY The Company manufactures sodium bicarbonate for both its consumer and specialty products businesses at its plants located at Green River, Wyoming and Old Fort, Ohio. The primary source of soda ash, a basic raw material used by the Company in the production of sodium bicarbonate, is the mineral trona, which is found in abundance in southwestern Wyoming near the Company Green River plant. The Company has adequate trona reserves under mineral leases to support the Company sodium bicarbonate requirements for the foreseeable future. The Company is party to a partnership agreement with General Chemical Corporation, which mines and processes trona reserves in Wyoming. Through the partnership and related supply and services agreements, the Company fulfills a substantial amount of its soda ash requirements, enabling the Company to achieve some of the economies of an integrated business capable of producing sodium bicarbonate and related products from the basic raw material. The Company also has an agreement for the supply of soda ash from another company. The partnership agreement and other supply agreements between the Company and General Chemical are terminable upon 2 years notice by either company. The Company believes that sufficient alternative sources of supply are available. The Company believes that ample sources of raw materials are available for all of its other major products. Detergent chemicals are used in a variety of the Company products and are available from a number of sources. Bottles, paper products and clay are available from multiple suppliers, although the Company chooses to source most of these materials from single sources under long term supply agreements in order to gain favorable pricing. The Company also uses a palm oil fraction in its rumen bypass fats products. Alternative sources of supply are available in case of disruption or termination of the supply agreements. The cost of surfactants, diesel fuel and oil based raw and packaging materials used primarily in the consumer businesses were higher in 2012 compared to 2011 The cost of soda ash was higher in 2012 than 2011, and the cost of palm fatty acid distillate (PFAD) used in SPD was lower in 2012 than 2011 Increases in the prices of certain raw materials could materially impact the Company costs and financial results if the Company is unable to pass such costs along in the form of price increases to its customers. The Company utilizes the services of third party contract manufacturers around the world for certain products. PATENTS AND TRADEMARKS The Company trademarks appear in upper case letters throughout this Annual Report. The Company trademarks are registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and also with the trademark offices of many foreign countries. The ARM & HAMMER trademark has been used by the Company since 1867, and is a valuable asset and important to the successful operation of the Company business. The Company products are sold under many other valuable trademarks held by the Company, including TROJAN, NAIR, ORAJEL, FIRST RESPONSE, XTRA, OXICLEAN, SPINBRUSH, BATISTE, SIMPLY SALINE, FELINE PINE, L IL CRITTERS and VITAFUSION. The Company portfolio of trademarks represents substantial goodwill in the businesses using the trademarks. U.S. patents are currently granted for a term of 20 years from the date the patent application is filed. Although the Company actively seeks and maintains a number of patents, no single patent is considered significant to the business as a whole. CUSTOMERS AND ORDER BACKLOG In each of the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, net sales to the Company largest customer, Wal Mart Stores, Inc. and its affiliates, were 24%, 23% and 23% respectively, of the Company total 10 Table of Contents consolidated net sales. The time between receipt of orders and shipment is generally short, and as a result, backlog is not significant. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of consolidated net sales in the 3 year period. RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT The Company conducts research and development activities primarily at its Princeton and Cranbury facilities in New Jersey. The Company devotes significant resources and attention to product development, process technology and basic research to develop differentiated products with new and distinctive features and to provide increased convenience and value to its customers. To increase its innovative capabilities, the Company engages outside contractors for general research and development in activities beyond its core areas of expertise. The Company spent $54.8 million, $55.1 million and $537 million on research and development activities in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. GOVERNMENT REGULATION General Some of the Company products are subject to regulation by 1 or more U.S. agencies, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ), the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ), the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ), the Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ), and foreign agencies. FDA regulations govern a variety of matters relating to our products, such as product development, manufacturing, premarket clearance or approval, advertising and distribution. The regulations adopted and standards imposed by the FDA and similar foreign agencies evolve over time and can require the Company to make changes in its manufacturing processes and quality systems to remain in compliance. These agencies periodically inspect manufacturing and other facilities. If we fail to comply with applicable regulations and standards, we may be subject to sanctions, including fines and penalties, the recall of products and cessation of manufacturing and or distribution. In addition, the Company sells products that are subject to regulation under the Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act, which are administered by the EPA. The Company also is subject to regulation by the FTC in connection with the content of its labeling, advertising, promotion, trade practices and other matters. The CPSC administers the Poison Prevention Packaging Act, and has issued regulations requiring special child resistant packaging for certain products, including pharmaceuticals, dietary supplements, and dietary substances, containing certain ingredients (e.g., iron). The Company relationship with certain union employees may be overseen by the National Labor Relations Board. The Company activities also are regulated by various agencies of the states, localities and foreign countries in which the Company sells its products. Medical Device Clearance and Approval To be commercially distributed in the U.S., a medical device must, unless exempt, receive clearance or approval from the FDA pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act ( FDCA ). Lower risk devices are categorized as either class I or II devices. For class II devices, the manufacturer must generally submit a premarket notification requesting clearance for commercial distribution known as a 510(k) clearance. Our condoms, home pregnancy and ovulation test kits are regulated as class II devices. Some low risk devices, including our SPINBRUSH and ARM & HAMMER battery powered toothbrushes, are in class I and are generally exempted from the 510(k) requirement. To obtain 510(k) clearance, a device must be determined to be substantially equivalent in intended use and in safety and effectiveness to a benchmark device, or predicate that 11 Table of Contents is already legally in commercial distribution. Any modification to a 510(k) cleared device that could significantly affect its safety or effectiveness, or that would constitute a change in its intended use, generally requires a new 510(k) clearance. A manufacturer may determine that a new 510(k) clearance is not required, but if the FDA disagrees, it may retroactively require a 510(k) clearance and may require the manufacturer to cease marketing or recall the modified device until 510(k) clearance is obtained. Medical Device Postmarket Regulation After a medical device is commercialized, numerous regulatory requirements apply, including the quality system regulation, which imposes current good manufacturing practice requirements governing the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the design, manufacture, packaging, servicing, labeling, storage, installation, and distribution of all finished medical devices intended for human use; labeling regulations, including a prohibition on product promotion for unapproved or off label uses; the medical device reporting regulation requiring a manufacturer to report to the FDA if its device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury or malfuncti1d in a way that would likely cause or contribute to a death or serious injury if it were to recur; and the reports of corrections and removals regulation, which requires a manufacturer to report recalls and field actions to the FDA if initiated to reduce a risk to health posed by the device or to remedy a violation of the FDCA that may present a risk to health. OTC Pharmaceutical The Company markets over the counter ( OTC ) pharmaceutical products, such as toothpaste, antiperspirant, and oral analgesics products, that are also subject to FDA and foreign regulation. Under the U.S. OTC monograph system, selected OTC pharmaceutical products are generally recognized as safe and effective and do not require the submission and approval of a new drug application. The FDA OTC monographs include well known ingredients and specify requirements for permitted indications, required warnings and precautions, allowable combinations of ingredients and dosage levels. Pharmaceutical products marketed under the OTC monograph system must conform to specific quality, formula and labeling requirements. All facilities where OTC pharmaceutical products are manufactured, tested, packaged, stored or distributed must comply with FDA current Good Manufacturing Practice ( cGMP ) regulations and or regulations promulgated by competent authorities in the countries where the facilities are located. All of the Company pharmaceutical products are manufactured, tested, packaged, stored and distributed according to cGMP regulations. The FDA performs periodic audits to ensure that the Company facilities remain in compliance with all appropriate regulations. The failure of a facility to be in compliance may lead to a breach of representations made to customers or to regulatory action against the Company related to the products made in that facility, such as seizure, injunction or recall. Serious product quality concerns could also result in governmental actions against the Company that, among other things, could result in the suspension of production or distribution of the Company products, product seizures, loss of certain licenses or other governmental penalties, and could have a material adverse effect on the Company financial condition or operating results. The manufacturer, packer, or distributor of an OTC pharmaceutical product marketed in the U.S., whose name appears on the label of such product, is required to report serious adverse events associated with the use of the product. The Company cannot predict whether new legislation regulating the Company activities will be enacted or what effect any legislation would have on the Company business. 12 Table of Contents Dietary Supplements The processing, formulation, safety, manufacturing, packaging, labeling, advertising, distribution, importing, selling, and storing of dietary supplements are subject to regulation by 1 or more federal agencies, including the FDA, the FTC, the CPSC, the EPA, and by various agencies of the states and localities in which the Company products are sold. The FDCA governs the composition, safety, labeling, manufacturing and marketing of dietary supplements. Generally, dietary ingredients that were marketed in the U.S. prior to October 15, 1994 may be used in dietary supplements without notifying the FDA. New dietary ingredients ( i.e., dietary ingredients that were not marketed in the U.S. before October 15, 1994) must be the subject of a new dietary ingredient notification submitted to the FDA at least 75 days before the initial marketing unless the ingredient has been present in the food supply as an article used for food without being chemically altered. A new dietary ingredient notification must provide evidence of a history of use or other evidence establishing that use of the dietary ingredient is reasonably expected to be safe. The FDA may determine that a new dietary ingredient notification does not provide an adequate basis to conclude that a dietary ingredient is reasonably expected to be safe. Such a determination could effectively prevent the marketing of the dietary ingredient. On July 5, 2011, the FDA issued draft guidance governing notification of new dietary ingredients. The draft guidance was issued for public comment and not for implementation. The guidance, if implemented, could effectively change the status of dietary ingredients that the industry has marketed as old dietary ingredients to new dietary ingredients that may require submission of a new dietary ingredient notification. The FDCA permits statements of nutritional support to be included in labeling for dietary supplements without FDA pre market approval. The FDA must be notified of those statements within 30 days of marketing. Among other things, the statements may describe the role of a dietary ingredient intended to affect the structure or function of the body or characterize the documented mechanism of action by which a dietary ingredient maintains such structure or function, but may not expressly or implicitly represent that a dietary supplement will diagnose, cure, mitigate, treat, or prevent a disease. A company that uses a statement of nutritional support in labeling must possess information substantiating that the statement is truthful and not misleading. If the FDA determines that a particular statement of nutritional support is an unacceptable drug claim or an unauthorized version of a health claim, or if the FDA determines that a particular claim is not adequately supported by existing scientific evidence or is otherwise false or misleading, the claim could not be used and any product bearing the claim could be subject to regulatory action. The FDA cGMP regulations govern the manufacturing, packaging, labeling and holding operations of dietary supplement manufacturers. All of the Company dietary supplements are manufactured, tested, packaged, stored and distributed according to cGMP regulations. The FDA performs periodic audits to ensure that the Company facilities remain in compliance with all appropriate regulations. The failure of a facility to be in compliance may lead to a breach of representation made to customers or to regulatory action against the Company related to the products made in that facility, seizure, injunction or recall. There remains considerable uncertainty with respect to the FDA interpretation of the cGMP regulations and their actual implementation in manufacturing facilities. The failure of a manufacturing facility to comply with the cGMP regulations may render products manufactured in that facility adulterated, and subjects those products and the manufacturer to a variety of potential FDA enforcement actions. In addition, under recent amendments to the FDCA, the manufacturing of dietary ingredients contained in dietary supplements will be subject to similar or even more burdensome requirements, which will likely increase the costs of dietary ingredients and subject suppliers of such ingredients to more rigorous inspections and enforcement. The manufacturer, packer, or distributor of a dietary supplement marketed in the U.S. whose name appears on the label of the supplement is required to report serious adverse events associated with the use of that supplement to FDA. The FTC exercises jurisdiction over the advertising of dietary supplements. The FTC considers whether a product advertising claims are accurate, truthful and not misleading pursuant to its authority under the Federal Trade Commission Act, or FTC Act. The FTC has instituted numerous enforcement actions against dietary 13 Table of Contents supplement companies for failure to adequately substantiate claims made in advertising or for the use of otherwise false or misleading advertising claims. These enforcement actions have resulted in consent decrees and the payment of civil penalties and or restitution by the companies involved. Such actions can result in substantial financial penalties and significantly restrict the marketing of a dietary supplement. Legislation may be introduced which, if passed, would impose substantial new regulatory requirements on dietary supplements. The effect of additional domestic or international governmental legislation, regulations, or administrative orders, if and when promulgated, cannot be determined. New legislation or regulations may require the reformulation of certain products to meet new standards, and require the recall or discontinuance of certain products not capable of reformulation. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS The Company operations are subject to federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws, rules and regulations relating to environmental and health and safety concerns including air emissions, wastewater discharges, and solid and hazardous waste management activities. The Company endeavors to take actions necessary to comply with such regulations. These steps include periodic environmental audits of each Company facility. The audits, conducted by independent engineering firms with expertise in environmental compliance, include site visits at each location, as well as a review of documentary information, to determine compliance with such federal, state, local and foreign laws, rules and regulations. Other than as described under Item 3, Legal Proceedings, in this Annual Report, the Company believes that it is in material compliance with existing environmental regulations. See Item 3, Legal Proceedings in this Annual Report for information regarding an environmental proceeding relating to the Company Brazilian subsidiary. GEOGRAPHIC AREAS Approximately 79% of the Company net sales in 2012, 2011 and 2010 were to customers in the U.S. Approximately 97%, 96% and 96% of the Company long lived assets were located in the U.S. at December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Other than the U.S., no 1 country accounts for more than 7% of consolidated net sales and 5% of total assets. EMPLOYEES At December 31, 2012, the Company had approximately 4,400 employees. The Company is party to a labor contract with the International Machinists Union at its Colonial Heights, Virginia plant, which expires May 31, 2013 Internationally, the Company employs union employees in France, Mexico, Brazil and New Zealand. The Company believes that its relations with both its union and non union employees are satisfactory. CLASSES OF SIMILAR PRODUCTS The Company operations, exclusive of unconsolidated entities, constitute 3 reportable segments Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD. The table set forth below shows the percentage of the Company net sales contributed by each group of similar products marketed by the Company during 2012, 2011 and 2010. % of Net Sales (In millions) 2012 2011 2010 Consumer Domestic Household Products 48 % 47 % 47 % Personal Care Products 26 % 25 % 26 % Consumer International 17 % 19 % 17 % Specialty Products 9 % 9 % 10 % The table above reflects consolidated net sales, exclusive of net sales of unconsolidated entities. 14 Table of Contents PUBLIC INFORMATION The Company maintains a web site at www.churchdwight.com and on the Investors SEC Filings page of the web site makes available free of charge the Company annual reports on Form 10 K, quarterly reports on Form 10 Q, current reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after the Company electronically files these materials with, or furnishes them to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. Also available on the Investors Corporate Governance page on the Company website are the Company Corporate Governance Guidelines, charters for the Audit, Compensation & Organization and Governance & Nominating Committees of the Company Board of Directors and the Company Code of Conduct. Each of the foregoing is also available in print free of charge and may be obtained upon written request to Church & Dwight Co., Inc., 500 Charles Ewing Boulevard, Ewing, New Jersey 08628, attention Secretary. The information presented in the Company website is not a part of this Annual Report and the reference to the Company website is intended to be an inactive textual reference only. 15 Table of Contents ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS The following risks and uncertainties, as well as others described elsewhere in this Annual Report, could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition Unfavorable economic conditions could adversely affect demand for our products. Unfavorable and uncertain economic conditions have adversely affected, and in the future may adversely affect, demand for some of our products, resulting in reduced sales volume or a shift in our product mix from higher margin to lower margin products. Factors that can affect demand include rates of unemployment, consumer confidence, health care costs, fuel and other energy costs and other economic factors affecting consumer spending behavior, including delays in the timing of tax refunds from the federal government, tax increases, and the expiration of the payroll tax break in December 2012 that resulted in an increase in Social Security taxes for U.S. workers. While the vast majority of our products generally are consumer staples that should be less vulnerable to decreases in discretionary spending than other products, they may become subject to increasing price competition as recessionary conditions continue. Moreover, some of our products, such as laundry additives and battery operated toothbrushes, are more likely to be affected by consumer decisions to control spending. Some of our customers, including mass merchandisers, supermarkets, drugstores, convenience stores, wholesale clubs, and dollar, pet and other specialty stores, have experienced and may experience in the future declining financial performance, which could affect their ability to pay amounts due to us on a timely basis or at all. We regularly review the financial strength of our key customers and, where appropriate, modify customer credit limits, which may have an adverse impact on future sales. Because the same economic conditions impact many of our suppliers, we also regularly conduct a similar review of our suppliers to assess both their financial viability and the importance of their products to our operations. Where appropriate, we intend to identify alternate sources of materials and services. To date, we have not experienced a material adverse impact from economic conditions affecting our customers or suppliers. However, a protracted economic downturn that adversely affects our suppliers and customers could adversely affect our sales and results of operations. We face intense competition in our markets, and the failure to compete effectively could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. We face intense competition from consumer products companies, both in the U.S. and in international markets. Most of our products compete with other widely advertised brands within each product category and with private label brands and generic nonbranded products of our customers in certain categories, which typically are sold at lower prices. Our products generally compete on the basis of product performance, brand recognition, price, value or other benefits to consumers. Consumer products, particularly those that are value priced like many of our products, are subject to significant price competition. As a result, we may need to reduce the prices for some of our products, or increase prices by an amount that does not cover manufacturing cost increases, to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. Any reduction in prices, or inability to raise prices sufficiently to cover manufacturing cost increases, would harm profit margins. In addition, if our sales volumes fail to grow sufficiently to offset any reduction in margins, our results of operations would suffer. Advertising, promotion, merchandising and packaging also have a significant impact on consumer purchasing decisions. A newly introduced consumer product (whether improved or newly developed) usually encounters intense competition requiring substantial expenditures for advertising, sales promotion and trade merchandising. If a product gains consumer acceptance, it normally requires continued advertising, promotional support and product improvements to maintain its relative market position. If our advertising, marketing and promotional programs are not effective or adequate, our sales and volume may be impacted. Many of our competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, The Sun Products Corporation, The Clorox Company, Colgate Palmolive Company, Henkel AG & Co. KGaA, Reckitt Benckiser Group plc, Johnson & Johnson, Alere Inc. (formerly known as Inverness Medical Innovations, Inc.), 16 Table of Contents Pfizer Inc., Bayer AG, and S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc. Many of these companies have greater financial resources than we do, and, therefore, have the capacity to outspend us on advertising and promotional activities and introduce competing products more quickly and respond more effectively to changing business and economic conditions than we can. In addition, our competitors may attempt to gain market share by offering products at prices at or below those typically offered by us. Competitive activity may require us to increase our spending on advertising and promotions and or reduce prices, which could lead to reduced profits and adversely affect growth. If we lose market share and the markets in which we compete do not grow substantially, our sales levels and operating results will decline. Loss of any of our principal customers could significantly decrease our sales and profitability. A limited number of customers account for a large percentage of our net sales. Wal Mart Stores, Inc., together with its affiliates ( Wal Mart ), is our largest customer, accounting for approximately 24% of net sales in 2012, 23% of net sales in 2011 and 23% of net sales in 2010. Our top 3 customers accounted for approximately 34% of net sales in 2012, 33% of net sales in 2011 and 33% of net sales in 2010. We expect that a significant portion of our net sales will continue to be derived from a small number of customers and that these percentages may increase if the growth of mass merchandisers continues. As a result, changes in the strategies of Wal Mart or any of our other largest customers, including a reduction in the number of brands they carry or a shift of shelf space to private label products, could materially harm our net sales and profitability. In addition, our business is based primarily upon individual sales orders and we rarely enter into long term contracts with our customers. Accordingly, these customers could reduce their purchasing levels or cease buying products from us at any time and for any reason. If we lose a significant customer or if sales of our products to a significant customer materially decrease, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Changes in the policies of our retailer customers and increasing dependence on key retailer customers in developed markets may adversely affect our business. In recent years, we have seen increasing retailer consolidation both in the U.S. and internationally. This trend has resulted in the increased size and influence of large consolidated retailer customers, who may demand lower pricing or special packaging or impose other requirements on us. These business demands may relate to inventory practices, logistics or other aspects of the customer supplier relationship. Some of our customers, particularly our high volume retail store customers, have sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. To the extent we provide concessions or better trade terms to those customers, our margins are reduced. Further, if we are unable to effectively respond to the demands of our customers, these customers could reduce their purchases of our products and increase their purchases of products from our competitors, which would harm our sales and profitability. In addition, reductions in inventory by our customers, including as a result of consolidations in the retail industry, or these customers managing their working capital requirements, could result in reduced orders for our products and adversely affect our results of operations for the financial periods affected by the reductions. The recent economic downturn also caused many of our customers to more critically analyze the number of brands they sell, and reduce or discontinue certain of our product lines, particularly those products that were not number 1 or 2 in their category. If this continues to occur and we are unable to improve distribution for those products at other customers, our results could be adversely affected. In addition, private label products sold by retail trade chains are typically sold at lower prices than branded products. As consumers look for opportunities to decrease discretionary spending, our customers have discontinued or reduced distribution of some of our products to encourage those consumers to purchase our customers less expensive private label products. To the extent customers discontinue or reduce distribution of 17 Table of Contents our products or our products are adversely affected by our customers actions to increase shelf space for their private label products, we will focus our efforts on improving distribution with other customers. However, if our efforts are not effective, our results could be adversely affected. A continued shift in the retail market from food and drug stores to club stores and mass merchandisers could cause our sales to decline. Our performance depends upon the general health of the economy and of the retail environment in particular, and could be significantly harmed by changes affecting retailing and the financial difficulties of our retailer customers. Consumer products, such as those marketed by us, are increasingly being sold by club stores and mass merchandisers, while sales of consumer products by food and drug stores comprise a smaller proportion of the total volume of consumer products sold. Sales of our products are stronger in the food and drug channels of trade and not as strong in club stores and mass merchandiser channels. Although we have taken steps to improve sales to club stores and mass merchandisers, if the current trend continues and we are not successful in further improving sales to these channels, our financial condition and operating results could suffer. Sales growth objectives may be difficult to achieve, and price increases, market category declines and changes to our product and geographic mix may impact our financial results. A significant percentage of our revenues comes from mature markets that are subject to high levels of competition. During 2012, approximately 79% of our sales were generated in U.S. markets. U.S. markets for consumer products are considered mature and commonly characterized by high household penetration, particularly with respect to our most significant product categories, such as laundry detergents, deodorizers, household cleaning products, toothpastes, antiperspirants and deodorants. Our ability to achieve unit sales growth in domestic markets will depend on increased use of our products by consumers, our ability to drive growth through product innovation, investment in our established brands and enhanced merchandising and our ability to capture market share from our competitors. If we are unable to increase market share in existing product lines, develop product improvements, undertake sales, marketing and advertising initiatives that expand our product categories and develop, acquire or successfully launch new products, we may not achieve our sales growth objectives. Even if we are successful in increasing sales within our product categories, a continuing or accelerating decline in the overall markets for our products could have a negative impact on our financial results. Volatility and increases in the price of raw and packaging materials or energy costs could erode our profit margins, which could harm operating results, and efforts to hedge against raw material price increases may adversely affect our operating results if raw material prices decline. The principal raw materials and packaging we use include surfactants (cleaning agents), paper products and bottles. Volatility and increases in the price of raw materials, or increases in the costs of energy, shipping and other necessary services, could significantly affect our profit margins if we are unable to pass along any higher costs in the form of price increases or otherwise achieve cost efficiencies, such as in manufacturing and distribution. In particular, during the past few years, we have experienced price increases for raw and packaging materials, diesel fuel and energy. Concerns about the adequacy of oil supply, in the face of increasing demand, continued to affect pricing. We have attempted to address these price increases through cost reduction programs and price increases of our own products, entering into pre buying arrangements with certain suppliers and entering into hedge agreements for diesel fuel costs. If raw material price increases continue, we may not be able to fully offset them, especially given the competitive environment. This volatility can significantly affect our production cost and could, therefore, harm our financial condition and operating results. We use hedge agreements to mitigate the volatility of diesel fuel prices and related fuel surcharges. The hedge agreements are designed to add stability to our product costs, enabling us to make pricing decisions and lessen the economic impact of abrupt changes in diesel fuel prices over the term of the contract. However, in periods of declining fuel prices, the hedge agreements can have the effect of locking us in at above market prices for fuel. 18 Table of Contents If our new products and product line extensions do not gain widespread customer acceptance or are otherwise discontinued, or if they cause sales of our existing products to decline, our financial performance could decline. Our future performance and growth depends on our ability to successfully develop and introduce new products and product line extensions. We cannot be certain that we will achieve our innovation goals. The successful development and introduction of new products involves substantial research, development, marketing and promotional expenditures, which we may be unable to recover if the new products do not gain widespread market acceptance. New product development and marketing efforts, including efforts to enter markets or product categories in which we have limited or no prior experience, have inherent risks. These risks include product development or launch delays, regulatory approval hurdles and the failure of new products and line extensions to achieve anticipated levels of market acceptance. In addition, if sales generated by new products result in a concomitant decline in sales of our existing products, our financial performance could be harmed. From time to time, we have discontinued certain products and product lines, which resulted in returns from customers, asset write offs and shutdown costs. We may suffer similar adverse consequences in the future to the extent we discontinue products that do not meet expectations or no longer satisfy consumer demand. If the reputation of 1 or more of our leading brands erodes, our financial results could suffer. Our financial success is directly dependent on the reputation and success of our brands, particularly the ARM & HAMMER, OXICLEAN and TROJAN brands. The effectiveness of these brands could suffer if our marketing plans or product initiatives do not have the desired impact on a brand image or its ability to attract consumers. Further, our results could be adversely affected if 1 or more of our leading brands suffers damage to its reputation due to real or perceived quality or safety issues, or other customer or consumer dissatisfaction, especially if such dissatisfaction were to be broadly disseminated including through the use of social media. Additionally, claims made in our marketing campaigns may become subject to litigation alleging false advertising, which, if successful, could cause us to alter our marketing plans and may materially and adversely affect sales or result in the imposition of significant damages against us. Product liability claims and withdrawals or recalls could adversely affect our sales and operating results and brand reputation. We are, from time to time, subject to product liability claims. We may be required to pay for losses or injuries actually or purportedly caused by our products, including losses or injuries caused by raw materials or other comp1nts provided by third party suppliers that are included in our products. Claims could be based on allegations that, among other things, our products contain contaminants, are improperly labeled, or provide inadequate instructions regarding their use or inadequate warnings concerning interactions with other substances. Whether or not successful, product liability claims could result in negative publicity that could harm our sales and operating results and the reputation of our brands. In addition, if 1 of our products is found to be defective or non compliant with applicable rules or regulations, we could be required to withdraw or recall it, which could result in adverse publicity and significant expenses. Although we maintain product liability and product recall insurance coverage (that also covers product withdrawals), potential product liability claims and withdrawal and recall costs may exceed the amount of insurance coverage or may be excluded under the terms of the policy, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. Compliance by us and certain of our suppliers with various existing and future regulations in the countries in which we operate could expose us to increased costs and other adverse consequences. The manufacturing, processing, formulation, packaging, labeling, marketing, distribution and sale of our products are subject to regulation by federal agencies, including the FDA, the FTC, the United States Department of Agriculture, the EPA and the CPSC. In addition, our operations are subject to the oversight of the EPA, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Labor Relations Board. Our activities are also regulated by various agencies of the states, localities and foreign countries in which our products are sold. 19 Table of Contents In particular, the FDA regulates the formulation, safety, manufacturing, packaging, labeling and distribution of condoms, home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, battery operated toothbrushes, over the counter pharmaceuticals and dietary supplements, including vitamins and minerals. The FDA also exercises oversight over cosmetic products such as depilatories. In addition, under a memorandum of understanding between the FDA and the FTC, the FTC has jurisdiction with regard to the promotion and advertising of these products, and the FTC regulates the promotion and advertising of our other products as well. As part of its regulatory authority, the FDA may periodically conduct inspections of the physical facilities, machinery, processes and procedures that we use to manufacture regulated products and may identify compliance issues that would require us to make certain changes in our manufacturing facilities and processes. The failure of a facility to be in compliance may lead to regulatory action against the products made in that facility, including seizure, injunction or recall, as well as to possible action against the owner of the facility manufacturer. We may be required to make additional expenditures to address these issues or possibly stop selling certain products until the compliance issue has been remediated. As a result, our business could be adversely affected. Likewise, any future determination by the FDA or a similar foreign agency, or by us in reviewing our compliance with applicable rules and regulations, that our products or quality systems do not comply with applicable regulations could result in future compliance activities, including product withdrawals or recalls, import detentions, injunctions preventing the shipment of products, or other enforcement actions. For example, the FDA may determine that a particular claim that we use to support the marketing of a product is not substantiated, may not accept the evidence of safety for a new product that we may wish to market, and may challenge the safety or effectiveness of existing products based on, among other things, changes in formulations, inadequate stability or shelf life, consumer complaints, or improper labeling. Similarly, we may identify these or other issues in internal compliance reviews of our operations and the operations and products of vendors and acquired companies. These other issues may include the identification of contaminants or non compliant levels of particular ingredients. We are in the process of assessing the manufacturing, advertising, labeling and stability of the products of Avid Health, which we recently acquired. As a result of this and similar internal reviews, we may be obligated to, among other things, revise or institute enhanced compliance procedures, revise manufacturing processes, product formulations or labeling, or effect product withdrawals or recalls. Any of the foregoing could subject us to adverse publicity, force us to incur unanticipated costs and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. From time to time, Congress, the FDA, the FTC or other federal, state, local or foreign legislative and regulatory authorities may impose additional laws or regulations that apply to us, repeal laws or regulations that we consider favorable to us, or impose more stringent interpretations of current laws or regulations. We are not able to predict the nature of such future laws, regulations, repeals or interpretations or to predict the effect additional governmental regulation, when and if it occurs, would have on our business in the future. Such developments could require reformulation of certain products to meet new standards, recalls or discontinuance of certain products not able to be reformulated, additional record keeping requirements, increased documentation of the properties of certain products, additional or different labeling, additional scientific substantiation, expanded adverse event reporting or other new requirements. Any such developments could increase our costs significantly and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our condom product line could suffer if the spermicide N 9 is proved or perceived to be harmful. Our distribution of condoms under the TROJAN brand and other trademarks is regulated by the FDA. Certain of our condoms, and similar condoms sold by our competitors, contain the spermicide nonoxynol 9 ( N 9 ). Some interested groups have issued reports that N 9 should not be used rectally or for multiple daily acts of vaginal intercourse. In late 2008, the FDA issued final labeling guidance for latex condoms but excluded N 9 lubricated condoms from the guidance. While we await further FDA guidance on N 9 lubricated condoms we believe that our present labeling for condoms with N 9 is compliant with the overall objectives of the FDA guidance, and that condoms with N 9 will remain a viable contraceptive choice for those couples who wish to use them. However, we cannot predict the nature of the labeling that ultimately will be required by the FDA. If the 20 Table of Contents FDA or state governments eventually promulgate rules that prohibit or restrict the use of N 9 in condoms (such as new labeling requirements), we could incur costs from obsolete products, packaging or raw materials, and sales of condoms could decline, which, in turn, could decrease our earnings. Environmental matters create potential liability risks. We must comply with various environmental laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate, including those relating to the handling and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes and the remediation of contamination associated with the use and disposal of hazardous substances. A release of such substances due to accident or an intentional act could result in substantial liability to governmental authorities or to third parties. We have incurred, and will continue to incur, capital and operating expenditures and other costs in complying with environmental laws and regulations. We currently are subject to environmental regulatory proceedings involving our Brazilian subsidiary, which has been fined the equivalent of approximately $24 million in the proceedings. Our Brazilian subsidiary is contesting the fine. It is possible that we could become subject to additional environmental liabilities in the future, particularly with respect to our operations in Brazil that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. We are subject to risks related to our international operations that could adversely affect our results of operations. Our international operations subject us to risks customarily associated with foreign operations, including currency fluctuations; import and export license requirements; trade restrictions; changes in tariffs and taxes; compliance with laws and regulations concerning ethical business practices, including without limitations, the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and United Kingdom Bribery Act; regulatory requirements for certain products; obstacles to repatriating foreign profits back to the U.S.; and difficulties in staffing and managing international operations. These risks could have a significant impact on our ability to commercialize our products on a competitive basis in international markets and may have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial position. In all foreign jurisdictions in which we operate, we are subject to laws and regulations that govern foreign investment, foreign trade and currency exchange transactions. In addition, we are exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk with respect to our sales, profits, assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Outside of the U.S., sales and costs are denominated in a variety of currencies, including the Euro, British Pound, Brazilian Real, Canadian Dollar, Mexican Peso, Chinese Yuan and Australian Dollar. A weakening of the currencies in which sales are generated relative to the currencies in which costs are denominated would decrease operating profits and cash flow. The Company, from time to time, enters into forward exchange contracts to reduce the impact of foreign exchange rate fluctuations related to anticipated but not yet committed intercompany sales or purchases denominated in the U.S. Dollar, Canadian Dollar, British Pound and Euro. We may not be able to continue to identify and complete strategic acquisitions and effectively integrate acquired companies to achieve desired financial benefits. As part of our business strategy, we seek to acquire or invest in businesses that offer products, services or technologies that are complementary to ours. We have made several acquisitions in recent years, including businesses previously operated by Del Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Orange Glo International, Inc., the SIMPLY 21 Table of Contents SALINE nasal moisturizer product line, the FELINE PINE natural cat litter product line and the BATISTE dry shampoo product line. Most recently, we completed the acquisition of Avid Health, a manufacturer of gummy form dietary supplements sold under the L IL CRITTERS and VITAFUSION brands. We may make additional acquisitions or substantial investments in complementary businesses or products in the future. However, we may not be able to identify and successfully negotiate suitable strategic acquisitions at attractive valuations, obtain financing for future acquisitions on satisfactory terms or otherwise complete future acquisitions. In addition, any acquisitions or investments, including the Avid Health acquisition, the integration of which is still ongoing, entail various risks, including the difficulty of entering new markets, the challenges of integrating the operations and personnel of the acquired businesses or products, the potential disruption of our ongoing business and the ongoing business of the acquired company, the need to review and, if necessary, upgrade processes of the acquired company to conform to our own processes, and, generally, our potential inability to obtain the desired financial and strategic benefits from the acquisition or investment. Any of these risks may divert management and other resources, require us to incur unanticipated costs or delay the anticipated positive impact on our business and results of the acquisition. The risks associated with assimilation are increased to the extent we acquire businesses that have stand al1 operations that cannot easily be integrated or operations or sources of supply outside of the U.S. and Canada, for which products are manufactured locally by third parties. These factors could harm our financial condition and operating results. Acquired companies or operations or newly created ventures may not be profitable or may not achieve sales levels and profitability that justify the investments made. In addition, future acquisitions or investments could result in substantial cash expenditures, the potentially dilutive issuances of new equity by us or the incurrence of additional debt or contingent liabilities, all of which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. In addition, any potential acquisitions or investments, whether or not ultimately completed, could divert the attention of management and resources from other matters that are critical to our operations. Our substantial indebtedness could adversely affect our operations and financial results and prevent us from fulfilling our obligations, and we may incur substantially more debt in the future, which could exacerbate these risks. As of December 31, 2012, we had approximately $9032 million of total consolidated indebtedness. This amount of indebtedness could have important consequences. For example, it could make it more difficult for us to satisfy our cash obligations; limit our ability to fund potential acquisitions; require us to dedicate a portion of our cash flow from operations to payments on our indebtedness, which would reduce the availability of our cash flow to fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes; limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, general adverse economic conditions or changes in our business and the industry in which we operate; and place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that have less debt. In addition, we may incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future to fund acquisitions, to repurchase shares or to fund other activities for general business purposes. If new debt is added to the current debt levels, the related risks that we now face could intensify. Any decision regarding our future borrowings will be based on the facts and circumstances existing at the time, including our credit rating. We may not have sufficient cash to service our indebtedness and pay cash dividends. Our ability to repay and refinance our indebtedness and to fund capital expenditures depends on our cash flow. In addition, our ability to pay cash dividends depends on cash flow and net earnings. Our cash flow and net earnings are often subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors 22 Table of Contents beyond our control, and such factors may limit our ability to repay indebtedness, declare and pay cash dividends and repatriate foreign earnings in a cost effective manner. A failure to service our indebtedness or obtain additional financing as needed could have a material adverse effect on our business operating results and financial condition. There can be no guarantee that we will continue to make dividend payments or repurchase our Common Stock. Although our Board of Directors has authorized share repurchase programs and recently increased the amount of the quarterly cash dividends payable on our Common Stock, any determinations by us to continue to repurchase the Common Stock or by our Board of Directors to continue to pay cash dividends on the Common Stock will be based primarily upon our financial condition, results of operations, business requirements, price of the Common Stock in the case of the repurchase program, and our Board of Directors continuing determination that the repurchase program and the declaration of dividends under the dividend policy are in the best interests of our stockholders and are in compliance with all laws and agreements applicable to the repurchase and dividend programs. In the event we do not declare a quarterly dividend, or discontinue our share repurchases, our stock price could be adversely affected. Recent volatility in the financial markets may negatively impact our ability to access the credit markets. In recent years, the banking system and financial markets have experienced severe disruption, including, among other things, bank failures and consolidations, severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, rating downgrades, declines in asset valuations and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. These conditions present the following risks to us, among others We are dependent on the continued viability of the financial institutions that participate in the syndicate that is generally obligated to fund our Credit Agreement. In addition, the Credit Agreement includes a commitment increase feature that enables us to increase the amount of our borrowing under the Credit Agreement, subject to lending commitments and certain conditions. Any disruption in the credit markets could limit the availability of credit or the ability or willingness of financial institutions to extend credit, which could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. Our short and long term credit ratings affect our borrowing costs and access to financing. A downgrade in our credit ratings would increase our borrowing costs and could affect our ability to issue commercial paper. Disruptions in the commercial paper market or other effects of volatile economic conditions on the credit market also could raise our borrowing costs for both short and long term debt offerings. Either scenario could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. Although we believe that our operating cash flows, together with our access to the credit markets, provide us with significant discretionary funding capacity, the inability of 1 or more institutions to fulfill their funding obligations under the Credit Agreement could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and operations. Changes in our effective tax rate may adversely affect our earnings and cash flow. Our future effective tax rate could be affected by changes in tax laws and regulations or their interpretation, changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, or changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The realization of deferred income tax assets is assessed and a valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. If the actual amount of our future taxable income is less than the amount we are currently projecting with respect to specific tax jurisdictions, or if there is a change in the time period within which the deferred tax asset becomes deductible, we could be required to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. The recording of a valuation allowance would result in an increase in our effective tax rate, and would have an adverse effect on our operating results. In addition, changes in statutory tax rates may change our deferred tax assets or liability balances, which would have either a favorable or unfavorable impact on our effective tax rate. 23 Table of Contents Resolutions of tax disputes may adversely affect our earnings and cash flow. Significant judgment is required in determining our effective tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We provide for uncertain tax positions with respect to tax positions that do not meet the recognition thresholds or measurement standards mandated by applicable accounting guidance. Fluctuations in federal, state, local and foreign taxes or changes to uncertain tax positions, including related interest and penalties, may impact our effective tax rate and our financial results. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities, and although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final outcome of tax audits and related litigation could be materially different than that reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. In addition, when particular tax matters arise, a number of years may elapse before such matters are audited and finally resolved. Favorable resolution of such matters could be recognized as a reduction to our effective tax rate in the year of resolution. Unfavorable resolution of any tax matter could increase the effective tax rate. Any resolution of a tax issue may require the use of cash in the year of resolution. Failure to effectively utilize or successfully assert intellectual property rights could materially adversely affect our competitiveness. The market for our products depends to a significant extent upon the value associated with our trademarks and brand names, including ARM & HAMMER, TROJAN and OXICLEAN. We own the material trademarks, brand names and patents used in connection with the marketing and distribution of our major products both in the U.S. and in other countries. Accordingly, we rely on trademark, trade secret, patent and copyright laws to protect our intellectual property rights. Although most of our material intellectual property is registered in the U.S. and in certain foreign countries in which we operate, we cannot be sure that our intellectual property rights will be effectively utilized or, if necessary, successfully asserted. There is a risk that we will not be able to obtain and perfect our own intellectual property rights, or, where appropriate, license from others intellectual property rights necessary to support new product introductions. We cannot be sure that these rights, if obtained, will not be invalidated, circumvented or challenged in the future, and we could incur significant costs in connection with legal actions relating to such rights. In addition, even if such rights are obtained in the U.S., the laws of some of the other countries in which our products are or may be sold do not protect intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the U.S. If other parties infringe our intellectual property rights, they may dilute the value of our brands in the marketplace, which could diminish the value that consumers associate with our brands and harm our sales. Our failure to perfect or successfully assert intellectual property rights could make us less competitive and could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. Our operations and the operations of our third party manufacturers, suppliers and customers may be subject to disruption from events beyond our or their control. Our operations, as well as the operations of our third party manufacturers, suppliers and customers may be subject to disruption from a variety of causes, including work stoppages, material shortages, financial difficulties, acts of war, terrorism, pandemics, fire, earthquake, flooding or other natural disasters. If a major disruption were to occur, it could result in harm to people or the natural environment, delays in shipments of products to customers or suspension of operations, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business. For example, as a result of Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, certain of our operations and the operations of certain of our customers and suppliers, including third party information technology service providers, were affected by the loss of electricity and other disruptions to our and their businesses. The financial impact of such losses and disruptions did not have a material adverse effect on our business, but future events may negatively impact our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We rely significantly on information technology. Any inadequacy, interruption, loss of data, integration failure or security failure of that technology could harm our ability to effectively operate our business and damage the reputation of our brands. We rely extensively on information technology systems, some of which are managed by third party service providers, to conduct our business. These systems include, but are not limited to, programs and processes relating 24 Table of Contents to internal communications and communications with other parties, ordering and managing materials from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping product to customers, billing customers and receiving and applying payment, processing transactions, summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, collecting and storing customer, consumer, employee, investor, and other stakeholder information and personal data, and other processes necessary to manage our business. Increased information technology security threats and more sophisticated computer crime, including advanced persistent threats, pose a potential risk to the security of our information technology systems, ne2rks, and services, as well as the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of our data. Our information technology systems, ne2rks or service providers could be damaged or cease to function properly, or we could suffer a loss or disclosure of business or stakeholder information, due to any number of causes, including catastrophic events, power outages and security breaches. Although we have business continuity plans in place to address service interruptions, if our business continuity plans do not provide effective alternative processes on a timely basis, we may suffer interruptions in our ability to manage or conduct our operations which may adversely affect our business. Any business interruptions or data security breaches, including cyber security breaches resulting in private data disclosure, could damage our reputation and could also adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows. Further, negative postings or comments about us on any social ne2rking website could damage our reputation, as could the disclosure of non public Company sensitive information through social media. We may not be able to attract, retain and develop key personnel. Our future performance depends in significant part upon the continued service of our executive officers and other key personnel. The loss of the services of 1 or more of our executive officers or other key employees could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations. This effect could be exacerbated if any officers or other key personnel left as a group. Our success also depends, in part, on our continuing ability to attract, retain and develop highly qualified personnel. Competition for such personnel is intense, and there can be no assurance that we can retain our key employees or attract, assimilate and retain other highly qualified personnel in the future. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS Not applicable. ITEM 2 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES 
