CIK: 721371
Company Name: CARDINAL HEALTH INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2012-08-22
Accession Number: 0000721371-12-000069


Item 1 Business General Cardinal Health, Inc. is an Ohio corporation formed in 1979. As used in this report, we, our, us and similar pronouns refer to Cardinal Health, Inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context requires otherwise. We are a healthcare services company providing pharmaceutical and medical products and services that help pharmacies, hospitals, surgery centers, physician offices and other healthcare providers focus on patient care while reducing costs, enhancing efficiency and improving quality. Our fiscal year ends on June 30. References to fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010 are to the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Except as otherwise specified, information in this Form 10 K is provided as of June 30, 2012 Pharmaceutical Segment In the United States, including Puerto Rico, the Pharmaceutical segment distributes branded and generic pharmaceutical, over the counter healthcare, and consumer products through its pharmaceutical distribution business to retailers (including chain and independent drug stores and pharmacy departments of supermarkets and mass merchandisers), hospitals, and other healthcare providers (including mail order pharmacies). This business maintains prime vendor relationships that streamline the purchasing process resulting in greater efficiency and lower costs for our customers; and renders services to pharmaceutical manufacturers including distribution, inventory management, data reporting, new product launch support, and contract pricing and chargeback administration. operates nuclear pharmacies and cyclotron facilities that manufacture, prepare and deliver radiopharmaceuticals for use in nuclear imaging and other procedures in hospitals and clinics; distributes specialty pharmaceutical products and provides services to pharmaceutical manufacturers, third party payors and healthcare service providers supporting the marketing, distribution, and payment for specialty pharmaceutical products; franchises retail pharmacies under the Medicine Shoppe and Medicap brands; and provides pharmacy services to hospitals and other healthcare facilities. In China, the Pharmaceutical segment distributes branded, generic and specialty pharmaceuticals, over the counter and consumer products as well as provides logistics, marketing and other services through Cardinal Health China. Pharmaceutical Distribution Our pharmaceutical distribution business generates gross margin primarily when the aggregate selling price to our customers exceeds the aggregate cost of products sold, net of cash discounts, generic manufacturer margin and margin under branded pharmaceutical agreements. Cash discounts are price reductions that manufacturers may offer to us for prompt payment of purchased products. Generic manufacturer margin refers to price discounts, rebates and other consideration that we receive under our agreements with manufacturers of generic pharmaceuticals. Our earnings on generic pharmaceuticals are generally highest during the period immediately following the initial launch of a generic product because generic pharmaceutical selling prices are generally highest during that period and tend to decline over time, although this may vary. Margin under branded pharmaceutical agreements refers primarily to fees we receive for rendering a range of distribution and related services to manufacturers. In addition, margin under branded pharmaceutical agreements may include benefits from pharmaceutical price appreciation, which occurs when a manufacturer increases its published price for a product after we have purchased that product for inventory. Bulk and Non Bulk Sales The Pharmaceutical segment differentiates between bulk and non bulk sales based on the nature of our customers operations. Bulk sales consist of sales to retail chain customers centralized warehouse operations and customers mail order businesses in the United States. All other sales are classified as non bulk. Sales to a retail chain pharmacy customer are classified as bulk sales with respect to its warehouse operations and non bulk sales with respect to its retail stores. Substantially all bulk sales consist of products shipped in the same form that we receive them from the manufacturer; a small portion of bulk sales are broken down into smaller units prior to shipping. In contrast, non bulk sales require more complex servicing. For non bulk sales, we may receive inventory in large or full case quantities and break it down into smaller quantities, warehouse the product for a longer period of time, pick individual products specific to a customer order, and deliver that smaller order to a customer location. Bulk sales generate significantly lower segment profit as a percentage of revenue than non bulk sales. Customers receive lower pricing on bulk sales of the same products than non bulk sales, as bulk sales require less services to be provided to these customers, and hence, less costs are incurred by us in providing these products. In addition, bulk sales in aggregate generate higher segment cost of products sold as a percentage of revenue than non bulk sales, due to the mix of products sold within the bulk category. Segment distribution, selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses as a percentage of revenue from bulk sales are substantially lower than from non bulk sales because bulk sales require substantially fewer services to be rendered by us than non bulk sales. 2 Table of Contents The following table shows the revenues, segment expenses, segment profit and segment profit as a percentage of revenue for bulk and non bulk sales for fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 . (in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Non bulk sales Revenue from non bulk sales $ 57,738 $ 51,816 $ 45,795 Segment expenses allocated to non bulk sales (1) 56,334 50,622 44,899 Segment profit from non bulk sales (1) $ 1,404 $ 1,194 $ 896 Segment profit from non bulk sales as a percentage of revenue from non bulk sales (1) 243 % 231 % 196 % Bulk sales Revenue from bulk sales $ 40,187 $ 41,928 $ 43,995 Segment expenses allocated to bulk sales (1) 40,033 41,793 43,880 Segment profit from bulk sales (1) $ 154 $ 135 $ 115 Segment profit from bulk sales as a percentage of revenue from bulk sales (1) 0.38 % 0.32 % 0.26 % (1) Segment expenses and profit required complex and subjective estimates and allocations based upon assumptions, past experience and judgment that we believe are reasonable. Specialty Pharmaceutical Products and Services We refer to products and services offered by our specialty solutions division as specialty pharmaceutical products and services. The specialty solutions division currently (1) distributes oncology, rheumatology and other pharmaceutical products to physician offices; (2) distributes human plasma products and some limited distribution pharmaceutical products to hospitals and other healthcare providers; and (3) provides various consulting and other services to pharmaceutical manufacturers, third party payors and healthcare providers primarily supporting the marketing, distribution and payment for these products. Our use of this terminology may not be comparable to the use by other industry participants. Pharmaceutical Segment Financials See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for Pharmaceutical segment revenue, profit and assets for fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 . Medical Segment The Medical segment distributes a broad range of medical, surgical and laboratory products to hospitals, surgery centers, laboratories, physician offices and other healthcare providers in the United States, Canada and China. This segment also manufactures, sources and develops its own line of private brand medical and surgical products. Manufactured products include single use surgical drapes, gowns and apparel; exam and surgical gloves; and fluid suction and collection systems. The segment also offers sterile and non sterile procedure kits. Our manufactured products are sold directly or through third party distributors in the United States, Canada, Europe, South America and the Asia Pacific region. In addition, the segment provides supply chain services, including spend management, distribution management, and inventory management services, to healthcare providers. Medical Segment Financials See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for Medical segment revenue, profit and assets for fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 . Acquisitions and Divestitures In the past five fiscal years, we completed the following 3 significant acquisitions apart from businesses spun off as part of CareFusion Corporation ( CareFusion ), as presented below. Date Company Location Line of Business Acquisition Price (in millions) July 15, 2010 Healthcare Solutions Holding, LCC ("P4 Healthcare") Ellicott City, Maryland Specialty pharmaceutical services $ 598 (1) November 29, 2010 Cardinal Health China Shanghai, China Pharmaceutical and medical products distribution 458 (2) December 21, 2010 Kinray, Inc. ( Kinray ) Whitest1, New York Pharmaceutical, generic, health and beauty, and home health care products distribution 1,336 (1) Includes $506 million in cash and $92 million for the acquisition date fair value of contingent consideration to be paid for the acquisition. We made cash payments of $14 million pursuant to the contingent consideration obligation, which included $10 million paid in fiscal 2011 and $4 million paid in July 2012 to settle the obligation. (2) Includes the assumption of approximately $57 million in debt. In addition, we completed several smaller acquisitions during the last five fiscal years, including purchasing Borschow Hospital & Medical Supplies, Inc. in fiscal 2009 and Futuremed Healthcare Products Corporation in fiscal 2012 During the past five fiscal years, we also completed several divestitures, including selling our United Kingdom based Martindale injectable manufacturing business in fiscal 2010. In addition, effective August 31, 2009, we separated our clinical and medical products businesses through distribution to our shareholders of 81 percent of the then outstanding common stock of CareFusion (the Spin Off ). During fiscal 2010, we disposed of 11 million shares of CareFusion common stock, and during fiscal 2011, we disposed of the remaining 30 million shares. Enturia Inc., a significant acquisition that was made in fiscal 2008, was spun off as part of CareFusion. 3 Table of Contents Customers Our largest customers, CVS Caremark Corporation ( CVS ) and Walgreen Co. ( Walgreens ), accounted for approximately 22 percent and 21 percent, respectively, of our fiscal 2012 revenue. The aggregate of our five largest customers, including CVS and Walgreens, accounted for approximately 59 percent of our fiscal 2012 revenue. Our contracts with CVS and Walgreens are currently scheduled to expire in June 2013 and August 2013, respectively. In August 2012, Walgreens issued a request for proposal for pharmaceutical distribution services for the 3 year period beginning after the expiration of our contract with Walgreens. In the ordinary course of our business, we frequently are in a competitive bid, or request for proposal, process for pharmaceutical distribution and other business of a customer or potential customer. In April 2012, Express Scripts, Inc., 1 of our pharmaceutical distribution customers, merged with Medco Health Solutions, Inc., which was a pharmaceutical distribution customer of a competitor. In April 2012, the combined company issued a request for proposal for its combined pharmaceutical distribution business. In July, 2012, Express Scripts, Inc. informed us that it had not awarded the combined contract to us. Our current pharmaceutical distribution contract with Express Scripts, Inc. expires on September 30, 2012 and provided approximately $9.0 billion of revenue in fiscal 2012, all of which is classified as bulk sales. Express Scripts, Inc. was our third largest customer in fiscal 2012 In addition, we have agreements with group purchasing organizations ( GPOs ) that act as agents to negotiate vendor contracts on behalf of their members. Our 2 largest GPO relationships in terms of member revenue are with Novation, LLC, and Premier Purchasing Partners, L.P. Sales to members of these 2 GPOs collectively accounted for 13 percent of our revenue in fiscal 2012 Suppliers We rely on many different suppliers. Products obtained from our five largest suppliers accounted for an aggregate of approximately 28 percent of our revenue during fiscal 2012, but no single supplier products accounted for more than 7 percent of that revenue. Overall, we believe our relationships with our suppliers are good. The Pharmaceutical distribution business is a party to distribution service agreements with pharmaceutical manufacturers. These agreements generally have terms ranging from 1 year, with an automatic renewal feature, to five years. Generally, these agreements are terminable before they expire only if the parties mutually agree, if there is an uncured breach of the agreement, or if 1 party is the subject of a bankruptcy filing or similar insolvency event. Some agreements allow the manufacturer to terminate the agreement without cause within a defined notice period. Competition We operate in a highly competitive environment in the distribution of pharmaceuticals and related healthcare services. We also operate in a highly competitive environment in the development, manufacturing and distribution of medical and surgical products. We compete on many levels, including service offerings, support services, breadth of product lines, and price. In the Pharmaceutical segment, we compete with national, full line wholesale distributors (including McKesson Corporation and AmerisourceBergen Corporation), regional wholesale distributors (including H.D. Smith and Morris & Dickson Co., L.L.C.), self warehousing chains, direct selling manufacturers, specialty distributors, third party logistics companies (including United Parcel Service, Inc.), and nuclear pharmacies, among others. In addition, the Pharmaceutical segment has experienced competition from a number of organizations offering generic pharmaceuticals, including telemarketers. In the Medical segment, we compete with many different distributors, including Owens & Minor, Inc., Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., PSS World Medical, Inc., Henry Schein, Inc., and Medline Industries, Inc. In addition, we compete with regional medical products distributors, third party logistics companies and manufacturers direct distribution. Competitors of the Medical segment manufacturing and procedural kit businesses include Kimberly Clark Corporation, Ansell Limited, DeRoyal Industries Inc., Medline Industries, Inc., Professional Hospital Supply and Medical Action Industries. Employees As of June 30, 2012, we had approximately 23,300 employees in the United States and approximately 9,200 employees outside of the United States. Overall, we consider our employee relations to be good. Intellectual Property We rely on a combination of trade secret, patent, copyright and trademark laws, nondisclosure and other contractual provisions, and technical measures to protect our products, services and intangible assets. We hold patents relating to the distribution of our nuclear pharmacy products and service offerings, and relating to medical and surgical products, such as fluid suction and irrigation devices; surgical waste management systems; surgical and medical examination gloves; surgical drapes, gowns and facial protection products; and patient temperature management products. We also operate under licenses for certain proprietary technologies, and in certain instances we license our technologies to third parties. We believe that we have taken all necessary steps to protect our proprietary rights, but no assurance can be given that we will be able to successfully enforce or protect our rights in the event that they are subject to third party infringement claims. While all of these proprietary rights are important to our operations, we do not consider any particular patent, trademark, license, franchise or concession to be material to our overall business. 4 Table of Contents Regulatory Matters Our business is highly regulated in the United States at both the federal and state level and in foreign countries. Depending upon their specific business, our subsidiaries may be subject to regulation by government entities including the United States Food and Drug Administration (the FDA ); the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (the DEA ); the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the NRC ); the United States Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ); United States Customs and Border Protection; state boards of pharmacy; state controlled substance agencies; state health departments, insurance departments or other comparable state agencies; and foreign agencies that are comparable to those listed above. These regulatory agencies have a variety of civil, administrative and criminal sanctions at their disposal. They can suspend our ability to distribute products or can initiate product recalls; they can seize products or impose criminal, civil and administrative sanctions; and they can seek injunctions to halt the manufacture and distribution of products. Distribution The FDA, DEA and various state authorities regulate the marketing, purchase, storage and distribution of pharmaceutical and medical products under various state and federal statutes including the Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987 and the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the "CSA"). Wholesale distributors of controlled substances must hold valid DEA registrations and state level licenses, meet various security and operating standards, and comply with the CSA which governs the sale, packaging, storage and distribution of controlled substances. As further discussed in Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements", on May 14, 2012, we entered into a settlement agreement with the DEA pursuant to which our Lakeland, Florida pharmaceutical distribution center's registration to distribute controlled substances will be suspended until May 15, 2014. During this suspension, our Lakeland facility will continue to distribute pharmaceutical products (other than controlled substances) while controlled substances will be shipped to customers from our other distribution centers. Our Pharmaceutical segment China distribution operations are subject to similar national, regional and local regulations, including licensing and regulatory requirements of the China Ministry of Health, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Finance, the State Food and Drug Administration and the General Administration of Customs. Manufacturing and Marketing Our subsidiaries that manufacture and source medical devices are subject to regulation by the FDA and comparable foreign agencies including regulations regarding compliance with good manufacturing practices and quality systems. The FDA and other domestic and foreign governmental agencies administer requirements that cover the design, testing, safety, effectiveness, manufacturing, labeling, promotion and advertising, distribution, importation and post market surveillance of some of our manufactured products. We need specific approval or clearance from regulatory authorities before we can market and sell many of our products in particular countries. Even after we obtain approval or clearance to market a product, the product and our manufacturing processes are subject to continued regulatory review. To assess and facilitate compliance with federal, state and foreign regulatory requirements, we routinely review our quality and compliance systems to evaluate their effectiveness and to identify areas for improvement or remediation. As part of our quality review, we assess the suppliers of raw materials, comp1nts and finished goods that are incorporated into the medical devices we manufacture. In addition, we conduct quality management reviews designed to highlight key issues that may affect the quality of our products and services. From time to time, we may determine that products we manufacture or market do not meet our specifications, regulatory requirements, or published standards. When we or a regulatory agency identify a quality or regulatory issue, we investigate and take appropriate corrective action, such as withdrawing the product from the market, correcting the product at the customer location, revising product labeling, and notifying customers. For example, in August 2011, the FDA notified us that it was halting entry into the United States of all Presource procedure kits that we assemble in Mexico and import through El Paso, Texas. The FDA indicated that we had not supplied adequate documentary support for certain comp1nts of these procedure kits, but did not indicate any concerns about patient safety. In response to the FDA's concerns we took remedial actions and have resumed importing procedure kits. Nuclear Pharmacies and Related Businesses Our nuclear pharmacies and cyclotron facilities require licenses or permits and must abide by regulations from the NRC, applicable state boards of pharmacy, and the radiologic health agency or department of health of each state in which we operate. In addition, our cyclotron facilities must comply with the FDA's good manufacturing practices regulations for positron emission tomography ( PET ) drugs that became effective in December 2011 Prescription Drug Pedigree Tracking and Supply Chain Integrity The FDA Amendments Act of 2007 requires the FDA to establish standards to identify and validate technologies for securing the pharmaceutical supply chain against counterfeit drugs. These standards may include track and trace or authentication technologies, such as radio frequency identification devices. In March 2010, the FDA issued guidance establishing standardized numerical identifiers for prescription pharmaceutical packages. Some states also have adopted or are considering adopting pedigree tracking laws. For example, effective July 2016, California will require that pharmaceutical wholesalers and repackagers implement electronic track and trace capabilities for pharmaceutical products. 5 Table of Contents Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Laws We are subject to healthcare fraud and abuse laws. These laws generally prohibit companies from soliciting, offering, receiving or paying any compensation in order to induce some1 to order or purchase Item or services that are in any way paid for by Medicare, Medicaid or other United States government sponsored healthcare programs. They also prohibit submitting or causing to be submitted any fraudulent claim for payment by the federal government. Violations of these laws may result in criminal or civil penalties, as well as claims under the federal False Claims Act and similar state acts under which private persons may file suit on behalf of the federal and state governments. Health and Personal Information Practices Services and products provided by some of our businesses, including some provided by our nuclear and pharmacy services and specialty solutions divisions, involve access to patient identifiable healthcare information. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as augmented by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, as well as some state laws, regulate the use and disclosure of patient identifiable health information, including requiring specified privacy and security measures. Federal and state officials have increasingly focused on how patient identifiable healthcare information should be handled, secured and disclosed. Some of our businesses collect and maintain other sensitive personal information that is subject to federal and state laws protecting such information. Security and disclosure of personal information is also highly regulated in many other countries in which we operate. Environmental, Health and Safety Laws In the United States and other countries, we are subject to various federal, state and local environmental laws, as well as laws relating to safe working conditions, laboratory and manufacturing practices. Laws Relating to Foreign Trade and Operations United States and international laws require us to abide by standards relating to the import and export of finished goods, raw materials and supplies and the handling of information. We also must comply with various export control and trade embargo laws, which may require licenses or other authorizations for transactions within some countries or with some counterparties. Similarly, we are subject to laws concerning the conduct of our foreign operations, including the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and foreign anti bribery laws. These laws generally prohibit companies and their intermediaries from offering, promising or making payments to officials of foreign governments for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business. Other Information Although our agreements with manufacturers sometimes require us to maintain inventory levels within specified ranges, our distribution businesses are generally not required by our customers to maintain particular inventory levels other than as needed to meet service level requirements. Certain supply contracts with United States government entities require us to maintain sufficient inventory to meet emergency demands, but we do not believe those requirements materially affect inventory levels. Our customer return policies generally require that the product be physically returned, subject to restocking fees. We only allow customers to return products that can be added back to inventory and resold at full value, or that can be returned to vendors for credit. We offer market payment terms to our customers. Revenue and Long Lived Assets by Geographic Area See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for revenue and long lived assets by geographic area. Available Information Our Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports are available free of charge on our website (www.cardinalhealth.com), under the Investors Financial information SEC filings caption, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file them with, or furnish them to, the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). You may read and copy any materials we file with the SEC at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. The SEC also maintains a website (www.sec.gov) where you can search for annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding us and other public companies. Item 1A Risk Factors The risks described below could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows. These are not the only risks we face. Our businesses also could be affected by risks that we are not presently aware of or that we currently consider immaterial to our operations. We could suffer the adverse effects of competitive pressures. As described in greater detail in "Item 1 Business" above, we operate in markets that are highly competitive. Because of competition, our businesses face continued pricing pressure from our customers and suppliers. If we are unable to offset margin reductions caused by these pricing pressures through steps such as effective sourcing and enhanced cost control measures, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. In addition, in recent years, the healthcare industry has continued to consolidate. Further consolidation among our customers and suppliers (including branded pharmaceutical manufacturers) could give the resulting enterprises greater bargaining power, which may adversely impact our results of operations. We have a few large customers that generate a significant amount of our revenue. Our sales and credit concentration is significant. CVS and Walgreens accounted for approximately 22 percent and 21 percent, respectively, of our fiscal 2012 revenue. The aggregate of our five largest customers, including CVS and Walgreens, accounted for approximately 59 percent of our fiscal 2012 revenue. In addition, Walgreens and CVS accounted for 25 percent and 19 percent, 6 Table of Contents respectively, of our gross trade receivable balance at June 30, 2012 Our contracts with CVS and Walgreens are scheduled to expire in June 2013 and August 2013, respectively. If CVS, Walgreens or 1 of our other large customers terminates or does not renew its contract, defaults in payment, or significantly reduces its purchases of our products, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. For example, in July 2012, Express Scripts, Inc. informed us that it had not awarded us the combined pharmaceutical distribution contract following its merger with Medco Health Solutions, Inc. Our contract with Express Scripts, Inc. expires on September 30, 2012 and provided approximately $9.0 billion of revenue in fiscal 2012, all of which was classified as bulk sales. The expiration of that contract will have an adverse effect on our results of operations and operating cash flow. Our Pharmaceutical segment's margin may be affected by fewer or less profitable generic pharmaceutical launches, prices established by manufacturers and other factors that are beyond our control. As described in greater detail in "Item 1 Business" above, margin in our Pharmaceutical segment consists, in part, of generic manufacturer margin and margin from branded pharmaceutical price appreciation. The number of new generic pharmaceutical launches varies from year to year, and the margin impact of new launches varies from product to product. Fewer generic pharmaceutical launches or launches that are less profitable than those previously experienced will have an adverse effect on our year over year margins. Additionally, prices for existing generic pharmaceuticals generally decline over time, although this may vary. Price deflation on existing generic pharmaceuticals will have an adverse effect on our margins. With respect to branded pharmaceutical price appreciation, if branded manufacturers increase prices less frequently or by amounts smaller than have been experienced historically, we will earn less margin on branded pharmaceuticals. The United States healthcare environment is changing in many ways, some of which may not be favorable to us, including changes resulting from federal healthcare legislation. The healthcare industry continues to undergo significant changes designed to increase access to medical care, improve safety and contain costs. Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement levels have declined; the use of managed care has increased; distributors, manufacturers, healthcare providers and pharmacy chains have consolidated; and large purchasing groups are prevalent. In March 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (collectively the Healthcare Reform Acts ) were enacted. Among other things, the Healthcare Reform Acts seek to expand health insurance coverage to over 30 million uninsured Americans. Many of the significant changes in the Healthcare Reform Acts do not take effect until 2014, including a requirement that most Americans carry health insurance. We expect expansion of access to health insurance to increase the demand for our products and services, but other provisions of the Healthcare Reform Acts could affect us adversely. The Healthcare Reform Acts contain many provisions designed to generate the revenues necessary to fund the coverage expansions, including, as discussed in "Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations below, a tax to be paid by medical device manufacturers. In addition, the Healthcare Reform Acts have provisions designed to reduce costs of Medicare and Medicaid, including changing the federal upper payment limit for Medicaid reimbursement to no less than 175 percent of the average weighted manufacturer's price ("AMP") from 250 percent of the lowest AMP for generic pharmaceuticals. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is also considering providing states with alternatives to traditional reimbursement metrics. We could be adversely affected directly or indirectly (if our customers are adversely affected) by these and other changes in the delivery or pricing of, or reimbursement for, pharmaceuticals, medical devices or healthcare services. Our business is subject to rigorous regulatory and licensing requirements. The healthcare industry is highly regulated. As described in greater detail in "Item 1 Business" above, we are subject to regulation in the United States at both the federal and state level and in foreign countries. In addition, the United States federal and state governments are devoting greater resources to the enforcement of these laws. If we fail to comply with these regulatory requirements, or if allegations are made that we fail to comply, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. To lawfully operate our businesses, we are required to hold permits, licenses and other regulatory approvals from, and to comply with operating and security standards of, governmental bodies. Failure to maintain or renew necessary permits, licenses or approvals, or to comply with required standards, could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. For example, see Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a discussion of regulatory matters relating to our distribution of controlled substances. Products that we manufacture, source, distribute or market are required to comply with regulatory requirements. Noncompliance or concerns over noncompliance may result in suspension of our ability to distribute, import or manufacture products, product recalls or seizures, or criminal and civil sanctions. We are required to comply with laws relating to healthcare fraud and abuse. If we fail to comply with them, we could be subject to federal or state government investigations, or false claims act proceedings initiated by private parties, which could result in civil and criminal sanctions, including the loss of licenses or the ability to participate in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state healthcare programs. The requirements of these laws are complicated and subject to interpretation and may be applied by a regulator, prosecutor or judge in a manner that could negatively impact us or require us to change our operations. 7 Table of Contents Our global operations are required to comply with the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and similar anti bribery laws in other jurisdictions and with United States and foreign export control, trade embargo and customs laws. If we fail to comply with them, we could suffer civil and criminal sanctions. We could be subject to adverse changes in the tax laws or challenges to our tax positions. We are a large multinational corporation with operations in the United States and many foreign countries. As a result, we are subject to the tax laws of many jurisdictions. From time to time, legislative initiatives are proposed, such as the repeal of last in, first out ("LIFO") treatment of inventory or the current U.S. taxation of income earned by foreign subsidiaries, that could adversely affect our tax positions, effective tax rate, tax payments or financial condition. Tax laws are extremely complex and subject to varying interpretations. Tax authorities have challenged some of our tax positions and it is possible that they will challenge others. These challenges may adversely affect our effective tax rate, tax payments or financial condition. CareFusion may not satisfy its contractual obligations. In August 2009, we entered into a tax matters agreement pursuant to which CareFusion is obligated to indemnify us for certain tax exposures and transaction taxes prior to the Spin Off. The indemnification receivable was $265 million at June 30, 2012 The failure of CareFusion to perform its obligations under this agreement could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. The Spin Off may have unexpected tax consequences. In connection with the Spin Off, we received a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) to the effect that the contribution by us of the assets of the clinical and medical products businesses to CareFusion and the distribution of CareFusion shares to our shareholders would qualify as a tax free transaction under Sections 355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code (the Code ). In addition, we received opinions of tax counsel to the effect that the Spin Off would qualify as a transaction that is described in Sections 355(a) and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. The IRS private letter ruling and the opinions of counsel rely on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from us and CareFusion regarding the past and future conduct of the companies' respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings is incorrect or not otherwise satisfied, we and our shareholders may not be able to rely on the IRS ruling or the opinions of tax counsel. Similarly, the IRS could determine on audit that the Spin Off is taxable if it determines that any of the facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or if the IRS disagrees with the conclusions in the opinions of counsel that are not covered by the private letter ruling or for other reasons. If the Spin Off is determined to be taxable for United States federal income tax purposes, we and our shareholders that are subject to United States federal income tax could incur significant tax liabilities. Our business and operations depend on the proper functioning of information systems and critical facilities. We rely on information systems to obtain, rapidly process, analyze and manage data to facilitate the purchase and distribution of inventory Item from numerous distribution centers; receive, process and ship orders on a timely basis; manage the accurate billing and collections for thousands of customers; process payments to suppliers; facilitate the manufacturing and assembly of medical products; and generate financial information. Our business also depends on the proper functioning of our critical facilities, including our national logistics center. Our results of operations could be adversely affected if these systems or facilities, or our customers' access to them, are interrupted, damaged by unforeseen events, cyber security incidents or other actions of third parties, or fail for any extended period of time. Any data security breach could adversely impact our operations, results of operations or our ability to satisfy legal requirements, including those related to patient identifiable health information. As further described below in "Item 9A Controls and Procedures", the Medical segment has implemented a medical business transformation project, which includes a new information system for certain supply chain and financial processes. If the system fails to operate as intended, it could adversely affect Medical segment profit and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. Because of the nature of our business, we may become involved in legal proceedings that could adversely impact our cash flows or results of operations. Due to the nature of our businesses, which includes the manufacture and distribution of healthcare products, we may from time to time become involved in disputes or legal proceedings. For instance, some of the products we manufacture or distribute may be alleged to cause personal injury or violate the intellectual property rights of another party, subjecting us to product liability or infringement claims. While we generally obtain indemnity rights from the manufacturers of products we distribute and we carry product liability insurance, it is possible that liability from such claims could exceed those protections. Litigation is inherently unpredictable, and the unfavorable resolution of 1 or more of these legal proceedings could adversely affect our cash flows or results of operations. Acquisitions are not always as successful as we expect them to be. An important element of our growth strategy has been to acquire other businesses that expand or complement our existing businesses. Acquisitions involve risks we may overpay for a business or fail to realize the synergies and other benefits we expect from the acquisition; or we may encounter unforeseen accounting, internal control, regulatory or compliance issues. 8 Table of Contents We depend on certain suppliers to make their raw materials and products available to us and are subject to fluctuations in costs of raw materials and products. We depend on the availability of various comp1nts, compounds, raw materials (including radioisotopes) and energy supplied by others for our operations. Any of our supplier relationships could be interrupted due to events beyond our control, including natural disasters, or could be terminated. A sustained supply interruption could have an adverse effect on our business. Our manufacturing businesses use oil based resins, cotton, latex, and other commodities as raw materials in many products. Prices of oil and gas also affect our distribution and transportation costs. Prices of these commodities are volatile and have fluctuated significantly in recent years, so costs to produce and distribute our products also have fluctuated. Due to competitive dynamics and contractual limitations, we may be unable to pass along cost increases through higher prices. If we cannot fully offset cost increases through other cost reductions, or recover these costs through price increases or surcharges, our results of operations could be adversely affected. Our global operations are subject to economic, political and currency risks. Our global operations are affected by local economic environments, including inflation, recession, currency volatility and competition. Political changes also can disrupt our global operations, as well as our customers and suppliers, in a particular location. We may not be able to hedge or obtain insurance to protect us against these risks, and any hedges or insurance may be expensive and may not successfully mitigate these risks. Economic conditions may adversely affect demand for our products and services . Deterioration in general economic conditions in the United States and other countries in which we do business could adversely affect the amount of prescriptions filled and the number of medical procedures undertaken and, therefore, reduce purchases of our products and services by our customers, which could adversely affect our results of operations. Item 1B Unresolved Staff Comments Not applicable.
