CIK: 721371
Company Name: CARDINAL HEALTH INC
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-08-26
Accession Number: 0001193125-11-233322


Item 1 Business General Cardinal Health, Inc. is an Ohio corporation formed in 1979. As used in this report, we, our, us and similar pronouns refer to Cardinal Health, Inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context requires otherwise. We are a healthcare services company providing products and services that help pharmacies, hospitals, surgery centers, physician offices and other healthcare providers focus on patient care while reducing costs, enhancing efficiency and improving quality. Our fiscal year ends on June 30. References to fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009 are to the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Except as otherwise specified, information in this Form 10 K is provided as of June 30, 2011 Business Segments The following business discussion is based on our 2 segments as they were structured for fiscal 2011 Pharmaceutical Segment In the United States, the Pharmaceutical segment distributes branded and generic pharmaceutical, over the counter healthcare, and consumer products through its pharmaceutical distribution business to retailers (including chain and independent drug stores and pharmacy departments of supermarkets and mass merchandisers), hospitals, and alternate care providers (including mail order pharmacies). This business maintains prime vendor relationships that streamline the purchasing process resulting in greater efficiency and lower costs for our customers. helps pharmaceutical manufacturers with services including distribution, inventory management, data reporting, new product launch support, and contract and chargeback administration. operates nuclear pharmacies and cyclotron facilities that manufacture, prepare and deliver radiopharmaceuticals for use in nuclear imaging and other procedures in hospitals and clinics; distributes specialty pharmaceutical products and provides services to pharmaceutical manufacturers, third party payors and healthcare service providers supporting the marketing, distribution, and payment for specialty pharmaceutical products; franchises retail pharmacies under the Medicine Shoppe and Medicap brands; and provides pharmacy services to hospitals and other healthcare facilities. In China, the Pharmaceutical segment distributes branded, generic and specialty pharmaceuticals as well as medical, surgical, over the counter and consumer products through our Yong Yu subsidiary. Yong Yu is 1 of the largest importers of pharmaceuticals into China and reaches a wide range of customers including more than 49,000 hospitals and clinics and more than 123,000 retail outlets. The pharmaceutical distribution business generates gross margin primarily when the aggregate selling price to our customers exceeds the aggregate cost of products sold, net of manufacturer cash discount, branded manufacturer margin, and generic manufacturer margin. Manufacturer cash discounts are price reductions that manufacturers may offer to us for prompt payment of purchased products. 2 Table of Contents Branded manufacturer margin refers to compensation amounts under distribution service agreements with manufacturers and to pharmaceutical price appreciation. Amounts earned under the distribution service agreements compensate us for a range of distribution and related services we provide to manufacturers and consist of a fee based on volume with or without pharmaceutical price appreciation. In addition, a manufacturer may increase its published price for a product after we have purchased that product for inventory. Our contract price for branded pharmaceutical products to customers is based on the manufacturer published price at the time of sale. As such, inventory sold following a manufacturer price increase will be based on the higher manufacturer price. Pharmaceutical price appreciation refers to amounts we earn from selling inventory at these increased prices. Generic manufacturer margin (also referred to as generic margin ) refers to price discounts, rebates and other incentives we receive from manufacturers of generic pharmaceuticals. Our earnings on generic pharmaceuticals are generally highest during the period immediately following the initial launch of a generic product because generic pharmaceutical selling prices tend to decline over time, although this may vary. Bulk and Non bulk Sales . The Pharmaceutical segment differentiates between bulk and non bulk sales based on the nature of our customers operations. Bulk sales consist of sales to retail chain customers centralized warehouse operations and customers mail order businesses. All other sales, including all sales to customers located in China, are classified as non bulk. Sales to a retail chain pharmacy customer are classified as bulk sales with respect to its warehouse operations and non bulk sales with respect to its retail stores. We formerly referred to bulk sales as bulk customers and non bulk sales as non bulk customers. Other than this change in terminology, we have not changed how we categorize revenue, segment expenses and segment profit with respect to our bulk and non bulk sales. Substantially all bulk sales consist of products shipped in the same form that we receive them from the manufacturer; a small portion of bulk sales are broken down into smaller units prior to shipping. In contrast, non bulk sales require more complex servicing. For non bulk sales, we may receive inventory in large or full case quantities and break it down into smaller quantities, warehouse the product for a longer period of time, pick individual products specific to a customer order, and deliver that smaller order to a customer location. Bulk sales generate significantly lower segment profit as a percentage of revenue than non bulk sales. Customers receive lower pricing on bulk sales of the same products than non bulk sales due to volume pricing in a competitive market and due to lower costs related to the fewer services we provide. In addition, bulk sales in aggregate generate higher segment cost of products sold as a percentage of revenue than non bulk sales, because bulk orders consist largely of higher cost branded products. The higher segment cost of products sold as a percentage of revenue for bulk sales is also driven by lower branded manufacturer margin and manufacturer cash discounts due to the mix of branded products in bulk sales. Segment distribution, selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses as a percentage of revenue from bulk sales are substantially lower than from non bulk sales because bulk sales require substantially fewer services to be rendered by us than non bulk sales. 3 Table of Contents The following table shows the revenues, segment expenses, segment profit and segment profit as a percentage of revenue for bulk and non bulk sales for fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009. (in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Non bulk sales Revenue from non bulk sales $ 51,815.5 $ 45,795.4 $ 44,134.7 Segment expenses allocated to non bulk sales (1) 50,685.2 44,908.4 43,2729 Segment profit from non bulk sales (1) 1,130.3 887.0 8618 Segment profit from non bulk sales as a percentage of revenue from non bulk sales (1) 218 % 194 % 195 % Bulk sales Revenue from bulk sales $ 41,928.0 $ 43,994.5 $ 43,728.2 Segment expenses allocated to bulk sales (1) 41,7935 43,879.7 43,554.3 Segment profit from bulk sales (1) 134.5 114.8 1739 Segment profit from bulk sales as a percentage of revenue from bulk sales (1) 0.32 % 0.26 % 0.40 % (1) Segment expenses and profit required complex and subjective estimates and allocations based upon assumptions, past experience and judgment that we believe are reasonable. In addition, amounts do not include the impact of last in, first out ( LIFO ) provisions, if any. We had no LIFO provisions in fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009. See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for Pharmaceutical segment revenue, profit and assets for fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009. Medical Segment The Medical segment distributes a broad range of medical, surgical and laboratory products to hospitals, surgery centers, laboratories, physician offices and other healthcare providers in the United States and Canada. This segment also manufactures, sources and develops its own line of private brand medical and surgical products. Manufactured products include single use surgical drapes, gowns and apparel; exam and surgical gloves; and fluid suction and collection systems. The segment also offers sterile and non sterile procedure kits. Our manufactured products are sold directly or through third party distributors in the United States, Canada, Europe, South America and the Asia Pacific region. In addition, the segment provides supply chain services, including spend management, distribution management, and inventory management services, to healthcare providers. See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for Medical segment revenue, profit and assets for fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009. 4 Table of Contents Acquisitions and Divestitures In the past five fiscal years, we completed the following 3 significant acquisitions apart from businesses spun off as part of CareFusion Corporation ( CareFusion ), as discussed below. Date (1) Company Location Line of Business Consideration (in millions) July 15, 2010 Healthcare Solutions Holding, LLC ( P4 Healthcare ) Ellicott City, Maryland Specialty pharmaceutical services $ 598 (2) November 29, 2010 Yong Yu Shanghai, China Pharmaceutical and medical products distribution $ 458 (3) December 21, 2010 Kinray, Inc. ( Kinray ) Whitest1, New York Pharmaceutical, generic, health and beauty, and home health care products distribution $ 1,336 (1) Represents the date we became the majority shareholder. (2) Includes $506 million in cash and $92 million for the acquisition date fair value of contingent consideration to be paid for the acquisition. (3) Includes the assumption of approximately $57 million in debt. We also completed several smaller acquisitions during the last five fiscal years, including purchasing Borschow Hospital & Medical Supplies, Inc. in fiscal 2009. During the past five fiscal years, we also completed several divestitures, including selling our former Pharmaceutical Technologies and Services segment, other than certain generic focused businesses, for approximately $32 billion in cash during fiscal 2007 and selling our United Kingdom based Martindale injectable manufacturing business in fiscal 2010. In addition, effective August 31, 2009, we separated our clinical and medical products businesses through distribution to our shareholders of 81 percent of the then outstanding common stock of CareFusion (the Spin Off ). During fiscal 2010, we disposed of 10.9 million shares of CareFusion common stock and during fiscal 2011, we disposed of the remaining 30.5 million shares. VIASYS Healthcare Inc. and Enturia Inc., 2 significant acquisitions in the last five years, were spun off as part of CareFusion. Customers Our largest customers, Walgreen Co. ( Walgreens ) and CVS Caremark Corporation ( CVS ), accounted for approximately 23 percent and 22 percent, respectively, of our revenue for fiscal 2011 The aggregate of our five largest customers, including Walgreens and CVS, accounted for approximately 59 percent of our revenue for fiscal 2011 We have agreements with group purchasing organizations ( GPOs ) that act as agents to negotiate vendor contracts on behalf of their members. Our 2 largest GPO relationships in terms of member revenue are with Novation, LLC, and Premier Purchasing Partners, L.P. Arrangements with these 2 GPOs accounted for approximately 14 percent of our revenue for fiscal 2011 Suppliers We rely on many different suppliers. Products obtained from our five largest suppliers accounted for an aggregate of approximately 22 percent of our revenue during fiscal 2011, but no single supplier products accounted for more than 5 percent of that revenue. Overall, we believe our relationships with our suppliers are good. 5 Table of Contents The Pharmaceutical distribution business is a party to distribution service agreements with pharmaceutical manufacturers. These agreements generally have terms ranging from 1 year with an automatic renewal feature to five years. Generally, these agreements are terminable before they expire only if the parties mutually agree, if there is an uncured breach of the agreement, or if 1 party is the subject of a bankruptcy filing or similar insolvency event. Some agreements allow the manufacturer to terminate the agreement without cause within a defined notice period. Our Pharmaceutical segment nuclear pharmacy services business dispenses several products prepared using a particular radioisotope. During fiscal 2010, it was difficult to acquire sufficient quantities of that radioisotope from third party suppliers because of a continued and prolonged shortage of a critical raw material used to derive that radioisotope. However, the supply of raw material normalized in the first half of fiscal 2011 Competition We operate in a highly competitive environment in the distribution of pharmaceuticals and related healthcare services. We also operate in a highly competitive environment in the development, manufacturing and distribution of medical and surgical products. We compete on many levels, including service offerings, support services, breadth of product lines, and price. In the Pharmaceutical segment, we compete with 2 other national, full line wholesale distributors (McKesson Corporation and AmerisourceBergen Corporation) and a number of regional wholesale distributors, self warehousing chains, direct selling manufacturers, specialty distributors, third party logistics companies, and nuclear pharmacies, among others. In addition, the Pharmaceutical segment has experienced competition from a number of organizations offering generic pharmaceuticals, including telemarketers. In the Medical segment, we compete with many different distributors, including Owens & Minor, Inc., Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., PSS World Medical, Inc., Henry Schein, Inc., and Medline Industries, Inc. In addition, we compete with regional medical products distributors, third party logistics companies and manufacturers direct distribution. Competitors of the Medical segment manufacturing and procedural kit businesses include Kimberly Clark Corporation, Ansell Limited, DeRoyal Industries Inc., Medline Industries, Inc., M lnlycke Health Care, America Contract Sterilization, Professional Hospital Supply and Medical Action Industries. Employees As of June 30, 2011, we had approximately 22,600 employees in the United States and approximately 9,300 employees outside of the United States. Overall, we consider our employee relations to be good. Intellectual Property We rely on a combination of trade secret, patent, copyright and trademark laws, nondisclosure and other contractual provisions, and technical measures to protect our products, services and intangible assets. We hold patents relating to aspects of our distribution operations, including our nuclear pharmacy products and service offerings, and relating to medical and surgical products, such as fluid suction and irrigation devices; surgical waste management systems; surgical and medical examination gloves; surgical drapes, gowns and facial protection products; and patient temperature management products. We also operate under licenses for certain proprietary technologies, and in certain instances we license our technologies to third parties. All of these proprietary rights are important to our operations, but we do not consider any particular patent, trademark, license, franchise or concession to be material to our overall business. 6 Table of Contents Regulatory Matters Our business is highly regulated in the United States at both the federal and state level and in foreign countries. Depending upon their specific business, our subsidiaries may be subject to regulation by government entities including the United States Food and Drug Administration (the FDA ), the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (the DEA ), the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the NRC ), the United States Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ), United States Customs and Border Protection, state boards of pharmacy, state controlled substance agencies, state health departments, insurance departments or other comparable state agencies, and foreign agencies that are comparable to those listed above. These regulatory agencies have a variety of civil, administrative and criminal sanctions at their disposal. They can require us to suspend distribution of products and controlled substances or initiate product recalls; they can seize products or impose significant criminal, civil and administrative sanctions; and they can seek injunctions to halt the manufacture and distribution of products. Distribution . The FDA, DEA and various state authorities regulate the marketing, purchase, storage and distribution of pharmaceutical and medical products and controlled substances under various state and federal statutes including the Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987. Wholesale distributors of controlled substances must hold valid DEA registrations and state level licenses, meet various security and operating standards, and comply with the Federal Controlled Substances Act governing the sale, marketing, packaging, storage and distribution of controlled substances. Our Pharmaceutical segment China distribution operations are subject to similar national, regional and local regulations, including licensing and regulatory requirements of the China Ministry of Health, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Finance, the State Food and Drug Administration and the General Administration of Customs. Manufacturing and marketing . Our subsidiaries that manufacture and source medical devices are subject to regulation by the FDA and comparable foreign agencies including regulations regarding compliance with good manufacturing practices and quality systems. In addition, our Medical segment international manufacturing operations may be subject to local certification requirements. The FDA and other domestic and foreign governmental agencies administer requirements covering the design, testing, safety, effectiveness, manufacture, labeling, promotion and advertising, distribution and post market surveillance of some of our manufactured products. We need specific approval or clearance from regulatory authorities before we can market and sell many of our products in particular countries. Even after we obtain approval or clearance to market a product, the product and our manufacturing processes are subject to continued regulatory review. To assess and facilitate compliance with federal, state and foreign regulatory requirements, we routinely review our quality and compliance systems to evaluate their effectiveness and to identify areas for improvement or remediation. As part of our quality review, we assess the suppliers of raw materials, comp1nts and finished goods that are incorporated into the medical devices we manufacture. In addition, we conduct quality management reviews designed to highlight key issues that may affect the quality of our products and services. 7 Table of Contents From time to time, we may determine that products we manufacture or market do not meet our specifications, regulatory requirements, or published standards. When we identify a quality or regulatory issue, we investigate and take appropriate corrective action, such as withdrawing the product from the market, correcting the product at the customer location, revising product labeling, and notifying customers. Nuclear pharmacies and related businesses . Our nuclear pharmacies and cyclotron facilities require licenses or permits and must abide by regulations from the NRC, the radiologic health agency or department of health of each state in which we operate, and the state board of pharmacy. In addition, the FDA regulates cyclotron facilities and has issued, effective December 2011, good manufacturing practices regulations for positron emission tomography ( PET ) drugs. Prescription Drug Pedigree Tracking and Supply Chain Integrity The FDA Amendments Act of 2007 requires the FDA to establish standards to identify and validate technologies for securing the pharmaceutical supply chain against counterfeit drugs. These standards may include track and trace or authentication technologies, such as radio frequency identification devices. In March 2010, the FDA issued guidance establishing standardized numerical identifiers for prescription pharmaceutical packages. Some states have also adopted laws to prevent the introduction of counterfeit, diverted, adulterated or mislabeled pharmaceuticals into the pharmaceutical supply chain. For example, effective July 2016, California requires that pharmaceutical wholesalers and repackagers implement electronic track and trace capabilities for pharmaceutical products. Healthcare Fraud and Abuse Laws We are subject to extensive and frequently changing laws and regulations relating to healthcare fraud and abuse. Laws and regulations generally prohibit soliciting, offering, receiving or paying any compensation in order to induce some1 to order or purchase Item or services that are in any way paid for by Medicare, Medicaid or other United States government sponsored healthcare programs. They also prohibit submitting or causing to be submitted any fraudulent claim for payment by the federal government. Violations of these laws may result in criminal or civil penalties as well as qui tam claims under the federal False Claims Act and similar state acts under which private persons may file suit on behalf of the federal and state governments. Health and Personal Information Practices Services and products provided by some of our businesses, including our pharmacy services and specialty pharmaceutical businesses, involve access to patient identifiable healthcare information. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as augmented by the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, as well as some state laws, regulate the use and disclosure of patient identifiable health information, including requiring specified privacy and security measures. Federal and state officials have increasingly focused on how patient identifiable healthcare information should be handled, secured and disclosed. Some of our businesses collect and maintain other personal information that is subject to federal and state laws protecting such information. Security and disclosure of personal information is also highly regulated in many other countries in which we operate. Environmental, Health and Safety Laws In the United States and other countries, we are subject to various federal, state and local environmental laws as well as laws relating to safe working conditions, laboratory and manufacturing practices. Laws Relating to Foreign Trade and Operations United States and international laws and regulations require us to abide by standards relating to the import and export of finished goods, raw materials and supplies and the handling of information. We also must comply 8 Table of Contents with various export control and trade embargo laws and regulations, which may require licenses or other authorizations for transactions within some countries or with some counterparties. Also, we must abide by United States and foreign customs laws and regulations. Similarly, we are subject to laws and regulations concerning the conduct of our foreign operations, including the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, foreign anti bribery laws and laws pertaining to the accuracy of internal books and records. These laws generally prohibit companies and their intermediaries from offering, promising or making payments to non United States government officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business. Other Information Our distribution businesses are generally not required by our customers to maintain particular inventory levels other than as needed to meet service level requirements. Certain supply contracts with United States government entities require us to maintain sufficient inventory to meet emergency demands, but we do not believe those requirements materially affect inventory levels. Our customer return policies generally require that the product be physically returned, subject to restocking fees. We only allow customers to return products that can be added back to inventory and resold at full value, or that can be returned to vendors for credit. We offer market payment terms to our customers. Revenue and Long Lived Assets by Geographic Area See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for revenue and long lived assets by geographic area. Available Information and Exchange Certifications Our Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K, and amendments to those reports are available free of charge on our website (www.cardinalhealth.com), under the Investors Financials SEC filings caption, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file them with, or furnish them to, the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). You may read and copy any materials we file with the SEC at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. The SEC also maintains a website (www.sec.gov) where you can search for annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding us and other public companies. Item 1A Risk Factors The risks described below could materially and adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows. These are not the only risks we face. Our businesses also could be affected by risks that we are not presently aware of or that we currently consider immaterial to our operations. We could suffer the adverse effects of competitive pressures. As described in greater detail in the discussion of our business in Item 1 above, we operate in markets that are highly competitive. Because of competition, our businesses face continued pricing pressure from our customers and suppliers. If we are unable to offset margin reductions caused by these pricing pressures through steps such as enhanced cost control measures, our results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. In addition, in recent years, the healthcare industry has continued to consolidate. Further consolidation among our customers and suppliers (including branded pharmaceutical manufacturers) could give the resulting enterprises greater bargaining power, which may adversely impact our results of operations. 9 Table of Contents We have a few large customers that generate a significant amount of our revenue. As described in greater detail in the discussion of our business in Item 1 above, our sales and credit concentration is significant. For example, Walgreens and CVS accounted for approximately 23 percent and 22 percent, respectively, of our revenue for fiscal 2011 The aggregate of our five largest customers, including Walgreens and CVS, accounted for approximately 59 percent of our revenue for fiscal 2011 In addition, Walgreens and CVS accounted for 31 percent and 20 percent, respectively, of our gross trade receivable balance at June 30, 2011 If 1 or more of our large customers default in payment, terminate or do not renew contracts, or significantly reduce their purchases of our products, our results of operations and financial condition could suffer. The United States healthcare environment is changing in many ways, some of which may not be favorable to us, including changes resulting from federal healthcare legislation. The healthcare industry continues to undergo significant changes designed to increase access to medical care, improve safety and contain costs. Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement levels have declined; the use of managed care has increased; distributors, manufacturers, healthcare providers and pharmacy chains have consolidated; and large purchasing groups are more prevalent. In March 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (collectively the Healthcare Reform Acts ) were enacted. Among other things, the Healthcare Reform Acts seek to expand health insurance coverage to approximately 32 million uninsured Americans. Many of the significant changes in the Healthcare Reform Acts do not take effect until 2014, including a requirement that most Americans carry health insurance. We expect expansion of access to health insurance to increase the demand for our products and services, but other provisions of the Healthcare Reform Acts could affect us adversely. The Healthcare Reform Acts contain many provisions designed to generate the revenues necessary to fund the coverage expansions and to reduce costs of Medicare and Medicaid. Beginning in 2013, each medical device manufacturer will have to pay a tax in an amount equal to 23 percent of the price for which the manufacturer sells its medical devices. We manufacture and sell devices that will be subject to this tax. Additionally, the Healthcare Reform Acts changed the federal upper payment limit for Medicaid reimbursement to no less than 175 percent of the average weighted manufacturer price from 250 percent of the lowest average manufacturer price for generic pharmaceuticals. We could be adversely affected by, among other things, changes in the delivery or pricing of or reimbursement for pharmaceuticals, medical devices or healthcare services. Our business requires consistent, diligent and rigorous compliance with regulatory and licensing requirements. The healthcare industry is highly regulated. As described above in greater detail in the discussion of our business in Item 1, we are subject to regulation in the United States at both the federal and state level and in foreign countries. In addition, the United States federal government and state governments are devoting greater resources to the enforcement of these laws. If we fail to comply with these regulatory requirements, or if allegations are made that we fail to comply, our results of operations and financial condition could suffer. To lawfully operate our businesses, we are required to hold permits, licenses and other regulatory approvals from, and to comply with operating and security standards of, governmental bodies. Failure to maintain or renew, or obtain without significant delay, necessary permits, licenses or approvals, or to comply with required standards, could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. Products that we manufacture, source, distribute or market are required to comply with regulatory requirements. Noncompliance or concerns over noncompliance could result in product corrective actions, recalls or seizures, warning letters, m1tary sanctions, injunctions to halt manufacture and distribution, civil or criminal sanctions, governmental refusal to grant approvals, restrictions on 10 Table of Contents operations, withdrawal of existing approvals and third party claims, which could have an adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition. We are required to comply with laws and regulations relating to healthcare fraud and abuse. If we fail to comply with them, we could be subject to federal or state government investigations, or false claims act proceedings initiated by private parties, which could result in civil judgments and criminal penalties including the loss of licenses or the ability to participate in Medicare, Medicaid and other federal and state healthcare programs. The scope or requirements of these laws or regulations may be interpreted or applied by a regulator, prosecutor or judge in a manner that could negatively impact or require us to change our operations. Our global operations are required to comply with the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and similar anti bribery laws in other jurisdictions and with United States and foreign export control, trade embargo and customs laws. If we fail to comply with them, we could suffer civil and criminal penalties. We could be subject to adverse changes in the tax laws or challenges to our tax positions. We are a large multinational corporation with operations in the United States and many foreign countries. As a result, we are subject to the tax laws and regulations of many jurisdictions. From time to time, legislative initiatives are proposed, such as the repeal of LIFO (last in, first out) treatment of inventory or the current U.S. taxation of income earned by foreign subsidiaries, that could adversely affect our tax positions, effective tax rate, tax payments or financial condition. Tax laws and regulations are extremely complex and subject to varying interpretations. Tax authorities have challenged some of our tax positions and it is possible that they will challenge others. These challenges may adversely affect our effective tax rate, tax payments or financial condition. Our Pharmaceutical segment margin may be affected by prices established by manufacturers or market forces that are beyond our control. As described in greater detail in the discussion of our business in Item 1, we generate a portion of our branded manufacturer margin from pharmaceutical price appreciation. If branded manufacturers increase prices less frequently or by smaller amounts, we will earn less branded manufacturer margin. In addition, prices for generic pharmaceuticals distributed by our pharmaceutical distribution business have generally declined over time, which could have an adverse effect on our generic manufacturer margin, if not offset by generic pharmaceutical programs, including new product launches. Our business and operations depend on the proper functioning of information systems and critical facilities. We rely on information systems to obtain, rapidly process, analyze and manage data to facilitate the purchase and distribution of thousands of inventory Item from numerous distribution centers; receive, process and ship orders on a timely basis; manage the accurate billing and collections for thousands of customers; process payments to suppliers; facilitate the manufacturing and assembly of medical products; and generate financial transactions and information. Our business also depends on the proper functioning of our critical facilities, including our national logistics center. Our results of operations could be adversely affected if these systems or facilities are interrupted, 11 Table of Contents damaged by unforeseen events or actions of third parties, or fail for any extended period of time. Any data security breach could adversely impact our operations, results of operations or our ability to satisfy legal requirements. The Medical segment is working on a medical business transformation project, which includes a new information system for certain supply chain processes. The Medical segment is planning to transition selected processes to the new system throughout fiscal 2012 and 2013 If the system is not effectively implemented or fails to operate as intended, it could adversely affect the Medical segment supply chain operations and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting. Because of the nature of our business, we may become involved in legal proceedings that could adversely impact our cash flows or results of operations. Due to the nature of our businesses, which includes the manufacture and distribution of healthcare products, we may from time to time become involved in legal proceedings. For instance, some of the products we manufacture or distribute may be alleged to cause personal injury or violate the intellectual property rights of another party, subjecting us to product liability or infringement claims. While we generally obtain indemnity rights from the manufacturers of products we distribute and we carry product liability insurance, it is possible that liability from such claims could exceed those protections. Litigation is inherently unpredictable and the unfavorable resolution of 1 or more of these legal proceedings could harm our cash flows or results of operations. Acquisitions are not always as successful as we expect them to be. An important element of our growth strategy has been to acquire other businesses that expand or complement our existing businesses. As described above, in fiscal 2011, we acquired Kinray, P4 Healthcare and Yong Yu. Acquisitions involve risks we may overpay for a business or fail to realize the synergies and other benefits we expect from the acquisition; we may encounter unforeseen accounting or internal control over financial reporting issues; or the acquired business may have regulatory or compliance issues that we did not anticipate. We depend on certain suppliers to make their raw materials and products available to us and are subject to fluctuations in costs of raw materials and products. We depend on the availability of various comp1nts, compounds, raw materials and energy (including radioisotopes and oil based resins, cotton, latex, diesel fuel and other commodities) supplied by others for our operations. Any of our supplier relationships could be interrupted due to events beyond our control, including natural disasters, or could be terminated. A sustained interruption in the flow of adequate supplies could have an adverse effect on our business. In addition, while we have processes to minimize volatility in comp1nt and material pricing, we may not be able to successfully manage price fluctuations. Our manufacturing businesses use oil based resins, cotton, latex, and other commodities as raw materials in many products. Prices of oil and gas also affect our distribution and transportation costs. Prices of these commodities are volatile and have fluctuated significantly in recent years, so our costs to produce and distribute our products also have fluctuated. Due to competitive dynamics and contractual limitations, we may be unable to pass along cost increases through higher prices. If we cannot fully offset cost increases through other cost reductions, or recover these costs through price increases or fuel surcharges, our results of operations could be adversely affected. Our global operations are subject to economic, political and currency risks. Our global operations are affected by local economic environments, including inflation, recession, currency volatility and competition. Political changes can disrupt our supply chain as well as our customers and 12 Table of Contents operating activities in a particular location. We may not be able to enter into hedges or obtain insurance to protect us against these risks, and any hedges that we enter into or insurance that we are able to obtain may be expensive and may not successfully mitigate these risks. Risks associated with the Spin Off. CareFusion may not satisfy all of its contractual obligations . We entered into a number of agreements with CareFusion that govern the rights and obligations of the parties following the Spin Off. We have certain rights under those agreements, including indemnification against certain liabilities allocated to CareFusion. The failure of CareFusion to perform its obligations under the agreements could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. The transaction may have unexpected tax consequences . In connection with the Spin Off, we received a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) to the effect that the contribution by us of the assets of the clinical and medical products businesses to CareFusion and the distribution of CareFusion shares to our shareholders would qualify as a tax free transaction under Sections 355 and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code (the Code ). In addition, we received opinions of tax counsel to the effect that the Spin Off would qualify as a transaction that is described in Sections 355(a) and 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. The IRS private letter ruling and the opinions of counsel rely on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from us and CareFusion regarding the past and future conduct of the companies respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings is incorrect or not otherwise satisfied, we and our shareholders may not be able to rely on the IRS ruling or the opinions of tax counsel. Similarly, the IRS could determine on audit that the Spin Off is taxable if it determines that any of the facts, assumptions, representations or undertakings are not correct or have been violated or if the IRS disagrees with the conclusions in the opinions of counsel that are not covered by the private letter ruling or for other reasons, including as a result of certain significant changes in stock ownership of either Cardinal Health or CareFusion. If the Spin Off is determined to be taxable for United States federal income tax purposes, we and our shareholders that are subject to United States federal income tax could incur significant tax liabilities. Item 1B Unresolved Staff Comments Not applicable.
