CIK: 885725
Company Name: BOSTON SCIENTIFIC CORP
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2011-02-17
Accession Number: 0000950123-11-015112


ITEM 1 BUSINESS The Company Boston Scientific Corporation is a worldwide developer, manufacturer and marketer of medical devices that are used in a broad range of interventional medical specialties. Our mission is to improve the quality of patient care and the productivity of healthcare delivery through the development and advocacy of less invasive medical devices and procedures. This is accomplished through the continuing refinement of existing products and procedures and the investigation and development of new technologies that are least or less invasive, reducing risk, trauma, procedure time and the need for aftercare; cost and comparatively effective and, where possible, reduce or eliminate refractory drug use. When used in this report, the terms we, us, our and the Company mean Boston Scientific Corporation and its divisions and subsidiaries. Our history began in the late 1960s when our co founder, John Abele, acquired an equity interest in Medi tech, Inc., a research and development company focused on developing alternatives to surgery. In 1969, Medi tech introduced a family of steerable catheters used in some of the first less invasive procedures performed. In 1979, John Abele joined with Pete Nicholas to form Boston Scientific Corporation, which indirectly acquired Medi tech. This acquisition began a period of active and focused marketing, new product development and organizational growth. Since then, we have advanced the practice of less invasive medicine by helping physicians and other medical professionals treat a variety of diseases and conditions and improve patients quality of life by providing alternatives to surgery and other medical procedures that are typically traumatic to the body. Our net sales have increased substantially since our formation over thirty years ago. Our growth has been fueled in part by strategic acquisitions and alliances designed to improve our ability to take advantage of growth opportunities in the medical device industry. On April 21, 2006, we consummated our acquisition of Guidant Corporation. With this acquisition, we became a major provider in the worldwide cardiac rhythm management (CRM) market, enhancing our overall competitive position and long term growth potential and further diversifying our product portfolio. This acquisition has established us as 1 of the world largest cardiovascular device companies and a global leader in microelectronic therapies. This and other strategic acquisitions have helped us to add promising new technologies to our pipeline and to offer 1 of the broadest product portfolios in the world for use in less invasive procedures. We believe that the depth and breadth of our product portfolio has also enabled us to compete more effectively in, and better absorb the pressures of, the current healthcare environment of cost containment, managed care, large buying groups, government contracting and hospital consolidation and will generally assist us in navigating through the complexities of the global healthcare market, including healthcare reform. Business Strategy Our strategy is to lead global markets for less invasive medical devices by developing and marketing innovative products, services and therapies that address unmet patient needs, provide superior clinical outcomes and demonstrate proven economic value. We intend to do so by building and buying products we understand, through sales forces we already have. The following are the five elements of our strategic plan Prepare our People We believe that our success will be driven by strong leadership, robust communication and the high caliber of our employees. We have strengthened our focus on talent assessment and leadership development, and are committed to developing our people and providing them with opportunities to contribute to the Company growth and success. Recently, we redefined the specific leadership criteria necessary for our people to allow us to win in our global marketplace. As a demonstration of our commitment to the preparation of our people, we have also developed a Leadership Academy, a set of integrated training and enrichment programs designed to support our goal of developing a culture of leadership at all levels within the organization. 3 Table of Contents Optimize the Company We plan to adapt our existing business model to allow us to operate in a more efficient manner and allow for enhanced execution, while providing better value to hospitals, better solutions to physicians and better outcomes to patients. In 2010, we began implementing several restructuring initiatives designed to strengthen and position us for long term success, including the integration of our Cardiovascular and CRM groups into 1 stronger and more competitive organization that we believe will improve our ability to deliver innovative products and technologies, leading clinical science and exceptional service; as well as the restructuring of certain other businesses and corporate functions. We are centralizing corporate research and development to refocus and strengthen our innovation efforts, and are organizing our clinical organization to take full advantage of the global resources available to conduct more cost effective clinical studies, accelerate the time to bring new products to market, and gain access to worldwide technological developments that we can implement across our product lines. In addition, we will look to transform the way we conduct research and development, leverage low cost geographies, and scrutinize our cost structure, which we expect will generate significant savings over the next 3 years. Win Global Market Share Through our global presence, we seek to increase net sales and market share, and leverage our relationships with leading physicians and their clinical research programs. We plan to re align our International regions to be more effective in executing our business strategy and renew our focus on selling in order to maximize our opportunities in countries whose economies and healthcare sectors are growing rapidly. We expect to invest $30 million to $40 million by the end of 2011 to introduce new products and strengthen our sales organization in emerging markets such as Brazil, China and India. Expand our Sales and Marketing Focus We are expanding our focus on sales, using new analytics, best practices and technologies to improve our sales methods and tools. We are also increasing our global sales focus through targeted sales force expansions and through delivering new global best practice capabilities in crucial areas such as training, management, forecasting and planning, and reaching the economic customer on a global basis. We offer products in numerous product categories, which are used by physicians throughout the world in a broad range of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. The breadth and diversity of our product lines permit medical specialists and purchasing organizations to satisfy many of their less invasive medical device requirements from a single source. In addition, we endeavor to expand our footprint in the hospital beyond our current product offerings to provide us greater strategic mass. Realign our Business Portfolio We are directing our research and development and business development efforts to products with higher returns and increasing our discipline and metrics to improve returns on our investments. We are realigning our business portfolio through strategic acquisitions and select divestitures in order to reduce risk, optimize operational leverage and accelerate profitable, sustainable revenue growth, while preserving our ability to meet the needs of physicians and their patients. We expect to continue to invest in our core franchises, and also investigate opportunities to further expand our presence in, and diversify into, priority growth areas including atrial fibrillation, autonomic modulation therapy, coronary artery disease, deep brain stimulation, diabetes obesity, endoluminal surgery, endoscopic pulmonary intervention, hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, structural heart disease, sudden cardiac arrest, and women health. We have recently announced several acquisitions targeting many of the above conditions and disease states, and, in January 2011, closed the sale of our Neurovascular business to Stryker Corporation. The sale of our Neurovascular business provides us with increased flexibility to fund acquisitions and repay debt. We believe that the execution of this strategy will drive innovation, accelerate profitable revenue growth and increase shareholder value. 4 Table of Contents Products During 2010, our products were offered for sale by seven dedicated business groups CRM; Cardiovascular, including our Interventional Cardiology and Peripheral Interventions businesses; Electrophysiology; Endoscopy; Urology Women Health; Neuromodulation; and Neurovascular. In 2010, we began the restructuring of our organization, which we believe will allow us to operate in a more effective and efficient manner, and includes the integration of our CRM and Cardiovascular groups into a newly formed Cardiology, Rhythm and Vascular group, which includes an Endovascular unit encompassing Peripheral Interventions, Imaging and Electrophysiology. During 2010, we derived 28 percent of our net sales from our CRM business, 42 percent from our Cardiovascular group, 2 percent from our Electrophysiology business, 14 percent from our Endoscopy business, six percent from our Urology Women Health business, four percent from our Neuromodulation business, and four percent from our Neurovascular business. The following section describes certain of our product offerings Cardiac Rhythm Management We develop, manufacture and market a variety of implantable devices that monitor the heart and deliver electricity to treat cardiac abnormalities, including Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) systems used to detect and treat abnormally fast heart rhythms (tachycardia) that could result in sudden cardiac death, including implantable cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT D) systems used to treat heart failure; and Implantable pacemaker systems used to manage slow or irregular heart rhythms (bradycardia), including implantable cardiac resynchronization therapy pacemaker (CRT P) systems used to treat heart failure. A key comp1nt of many of our implantable device systems is our remote LATITUDE Patient Management System, which enables physicians to monitor device performance remotely while patients are in their homes, allowing for more frequent monitoring in order to guide treatment decisions. In 2010, we launched several new CRM products, including an upgrade to our LATITUDE system, providing enhanced functionality, as well as our new 4 SITE lead delivery system. We have experienced continued success with our next generation COGNIS CRT D and TELIGEN ICD systems, as well as our ALTRUA family of pacemaker systems and, in 2011 and 2012, we will continue to execute on our product pipeline with the expected launch of our next generation INGENIO pacemaker system, and our next generation line of defibrillators, INCEPTA , ENERGEN and PUNCTUA . This product line includes new features designed to improve functionality, diagnostic capability and ease of use. Interventional Cardiology Coronary Stent Systems Our broad, innovative product offerings have enabled us to become a leader in the interventional cardiology market. This leadership is due in large part to our coronary stent product offerings. Coronary stents are tiny, mesh tubes used in the treatment of coronary artery disease, which are implanted in patients to prop open arteries and facilitate blood flow to and from the heart. Our VeriFLEX (Libert ) bare metal coronary stent system is designed to enhance deliverability and conformability, particularly in challenging lesions. We have further enhanced the outcomes associated with the use of coronary stents, particularly the processes that lead to restenosis 1 , through dedicated internal and external product development, strategic alliances and scientific research of drug eluting stent systems. We are the only company in the industry to offer a 2 drug platform strategy with our paclitaxel eluting and everolimus eluting stent system offerings, and are the industry leader for 1 The growth of neointimal tissue within an artery after angioplasty and stenting. 5 Table of Contents widest range of coronary stent sizes. In 2010, we launched our third generation TAXUS Element paclitaxel eluting stent system in our Europe Middle East Africa (EMEA) region and certain Inter Continental countries, and continue to sell our second generation TAXUS Libert paclitaxel eluting stent system in the U.S. and Japan. We also market the PROMUS everolimus eluting stent system, currently supplied to us in the U.S. and Japan by Abbott Laboratories, as well as our next generation internally developed and manufactured everolimus eluting stent system, the PROMUS Element stent system, currently marketed in our EMEA region and certain Inter Continental countries. We expect to launch our PROMUS Element stent system in the U.S. and Japan in mid 2012, and our TAXUS Element stent system in the U.S. (to be commercialized as ION ) mid 2011 and Japan in late 2011 or early 2012 Coronary Revascularization We market a broad line of products used to treat patients with atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis, a principal cause of coronary artery obstructive disease, is characterized by a thickening of the walls of the coronary arteries and a narrowing of arterial openings caused by the progressive development of deposits of plaque. Our product offerings include balloon catheters, rotational atherectomy systems, guide wires, guide catheters, embolic protection devices, and diagnostic catheters used in percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA). In 2010, we launched our Apex pre dilatation balloon catheter with platinum marker bands for improved radiopacity, our NC Quantum Apex post dilatation balloon catheter, developed specifically to address physicians needs in optimizing coronary stent deployment, which has been received very positively in the market, as well as our Kinetix family of guidewires. We continue to hold a strong leadership position in the PTCA balloon catheter market with an estimated 56 percent share of the U.S. market, and 38 percent worldwide. Intraluminal Ultrasound Imaging We market a family of intraluminal catheter directed ultrasound imaging catheters and systems for use in coronary arteries and heart chambers as well as certain peripheral vessels. The iLab Ultrasound Imaging System continues as our flagship console and is compatible with our full line of imaging catheters. This system is designed to enhance the diagnosis and treatment of blocked vessels and heart disorders. Structural Heart Therapy In January 2011, as part of our priority growth initiatives, we completed the acquisition of Sadra Medical, Inc. Sadra is developing a fully repositionable and retrievable device for percutaneous aortic valve replacement (PAVR) to treat patients with severe aortic stenosis and recently completed a series of European feasibility studies for its Lotus Valve System, which consists of a stent mounted tissue valve prosthesis and catheter delivery system for guidance and placement of the valve. The low profile delivery system and introducer sheath are designed to enable accurate positioning, repositioning and retrieval at any time prior to release of the aortic valve implant. PAVR is 1 of the fastest growing medical device markets. Electrophysiology Within our Electrophysiology business, we develop less invasive medical technologies used in the diagnosis and treatment of rate and rhythm disorders of the heart. Included in our product offerings are radio frequency generators, intracardiac ultrasound and steerable ablation catheters, and diagnostic catheters. Our leading products include the Blazer line of ablation catheters, including our next generation Blazer Prime ablation catheter, designed to deliver enhanced performance, responsiveness and durability, and the Chilli II cooled ablation catheter. In January 2011, as part of our priority growth initiatives, we announced the signing of a definitive merger agreement under which we will acquire Atritech, Inc., subject to customary closing conditions. Atritech has developed a novel device designed to close the left atrial appendage in patients with atrial fibrillation who are at risk for ischemic stroke. The WATCHMAN Left Atrial Appendage Closure Technology, developed by Atritech, is the first device proven in a randomized clinical trial to offer an alternative to anticoagulant drugs, and is approved for use in CE Mark countries. 6 Table of Contents Peripheral Interventions We sell various products designed to treat patients with peripheral disease (disease which appears in blood vessels other than in the heart and in the biliary tree), including a broad line of medical devices used in percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and peripheral vascular stenting. Our peripheral product offerings include stents, balloon catheters, sheaths, wires and vena cava filters, and we hold the number 1 position in the worldwide Peripheral Interventions market. We market the PolarCath peripheral dilatation system used in CryoPlasty Therapy, an innovative approach to the treatment of peripheral artery disease in the lower extremities. In 2010, we successfully launched several of our market leading products internationally, including the launch in Japan of our Carotid WALLSTENT Monorail Endoprosthesis for the treatment of patients with carotid artery disease who are at high risk for surgery. We also sell products designed to treat patients with non vascular disease (disease which appears outside the blood system). Our non vascular suite of products includes biliary stents, drainage catheters and micro puncture sets designed to treat, diagnose and ease various forms of benign and malignant tumors. In 2010, our Express LD Stent System received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for an iliac indication, and we continued to market our Express SD Renal Monorail premounted stent system for use as an adjunct therapy to percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty in certain lesions of the renal arteries; as well as our Sterling Monorail and Over the Wire balloon dilatation catheter for use in the renal and lower extremity arteries, and our extensive line of Interventional Oncology product solutions. Embolic Protection Our FilterWire EZ Embolic Protection System is a low profile filter designed to capture embolic material that may become dislodged during a procedure, which could otherwise travel into the microvasculature where it could cause a heart attack or stroke. It is commercially available in the U.S., our EMEA region and certain Inter Continental countries for multiple indications, including the treatment of disease in peripheral, coronary and carotid vessels. It is also available in the U.S. for the treatment of saphenous vein grafts and carotid artery stenting procedures. Endoscopy Gastroenterology We market a broad range of products to diagnose, treat and ease a variety of digestive diseases, including those affecting the esophagus, stomach, liver, pancreas, duodenum, and colon. Common disease states include esophagitis, portal hypertension, peptic ulcers as well as esophageal, biliary, pancreatic and colonic cancer. We offer the Radial Jaw 4 Single Use Biopsy Forceps, which are designed to enable collection of large high quality tissue specimens without the need to use large channel therapeutic endoscopes and, in 2010, expanded our offering of this product to include a wider variety of sizes. Our exclusive line of RX Biliary System devices are designed to provide greater access and control for physicians to diagnose and treat challenging conditions of the bile ducts, such as removing gallst1s, opening obstructed bile ducts and obtaining biopsies in suspected tumors. We also market the Spyglass Direct Visualization System for direct imaging of the pancreatico biliary system. The Spyglass System is the first single operator cholangioscopy device that offers clinicians a direct visualization of the pancreatico biliary system and includes supporting devices for tissue acquisition, st1 management and lithotripsy. In 2010, we continued commercialization of our WallFlex family of stents, in particular, the WallFlex Biliary line and WallFlex Esophageal line; and our Resolution Clip Device, used to treat gastrointestinal bleeding. Our Resolution Clip is the only currently marketed mechanical clip designed to open and close, up to five times, before deployment to help enable a physician to see the effects of the clip before committing to deployment. Interventional Bronchoscopy We market devices to diagnose, treat and ease pulmonary disease systems within the airway and lungs. Our products are designed to help perform biopsies, retrieve foreign bodies from the airway, open narrowings of an 7 Table of Contents airway, stop internal bleeding, and ease symptoms of some types of airway cancers. Our product line includes pulmonary biopsy forceps, transbronchial aspiration needles, cytology brushes and tracheobronchial stents used to dilate narrowed airway passages or for tumor management. In addition, as part of our priority growth initiatives, in October 2010, we completed our acquisition of Asthmatx, Inc. Asthmatx designs, manufactures and markets a less invasive, catheter based bronchial thermoplasty procedure for the treatment of severe persistent asthma. The Alair Bronchial Thermoplasty System, developed by Asthmatx, has both CE Mark and FDA approval and is the first device based asthma treatment approved by the FDA. Urology Women Health Our Urology Women Health division develops and manufactures devices to treat various urological and gynecological disorders. We sell a variety of products designed to treat patients with urinary st1 disease, stress urinary incontinence, pelvic organ prolapse and excessive uterine bleeding. We offer a full line of st1 management products, including ureteral stents, wires, lithotripsy devices, st1 retrieval devices, sheaths, balloons and catheters. We continue to expand our focus on Women Health. We market a range of devices for the treatment of conditions such as female urinary incontinence, pelvic floor reconstruction (rebuilding of the anatomy to its original state), and menorrhagia (excessive menstrual bleeding). We offer a full breadth of mid urethral sling products, sling materials, graft materials, pelvic floor reconstruction kits, and suturing devices. We recently launched our Genesys Hydro ThermAblator (HTA) system, a next generation endometrial ablation system designed to ablate the endometrial lining of the uterus in premenopausal women with menorrhagia. The Genesys HTA System features a smaller and lighter console, simplified set up requirements, and an enhanced graphic user interface and is designed to improve operating performance. Neuromodulation Within our Neuromodulation business, we market the Precision Spinal Cord Stimulation (SCS) system, used for the management of chronic pain. This system delivers pain management by applying an electrical signal to mask pain signals traveling from the spinal cord to the brain. The Precision System utilizes a rechargeable battery and features a programming system. In 2010, we received FDA approval and launched 2 lead splitters, as well as the Linear 3 4 and Linear 3 6 Percutaneous Leads for use with our SCS systems, offering a broader range of lead configurations and designed to provide physicians more treatment options for their chronic pain patients. These leads provide the broadest range of percutaneous lead configurations in the industry. We believe that we continue to have a technology advantage over our competitors with proprietary features such as Multiple Independent Current Control, which is intended to allow the physician to target specific areas of pain more precisely, and are involved in various studies designed to evaluate the use of spinal cord stimulation in the treatment of additional sources of pain. As a demonstration of our commitment to strengthening clinical evidence with spinal cord stimulation, we have initiated a trial to assess the therapeutic effectiveness and cost effectiveness of spinal cord stimulation compared to reoperation in patients with failed back surgery syndrome. We believe that this trial could result in consideration of spinal cord stimulation much earlier in the continuum of care. In addition, in late 2010 we initiated a European clinical trial for the treatment of Parkinson disease using our Vercise deep brain stimulation system, and, in January 2011, we completed the acquisition of Intelect Medical, Inc., a development stage company developing advanced visualization and programming for the Vercise system. We believe this acquisition leverages the core architecture of our Vercise platform and advances the field of deep brain stimulation. Neurovascular In January 2011, we closed the sale of our Neurovascular business to Stryker Corporation. This business markets a broad line of coated and uncoated detachable coils, micro delivery stents, micro guidewires, micro catheters, guiding catheters and embolics to neuro interventional radiologists and neurosurgeons to treat diseases of the neurovascular system. In 2010, we marketed the GDC Coils (Guglielmi Detachable Coil) and Matrix systems to treat brain aneurysms and, in late 2010, we received FDA approval for the next generation family of detachable coils, which includes an enhanced delivery system designed to reduce coil detachment times, and began a phased 8 Table of Contents launch of the product. We also offered the NeuroForm stent system, and launched the Neuroform EZ stent system, a fourth generation intracranial aneurysm stent system designed for use in conjunction with endovascular coiling to treat wide necked aneurysm, and the Wingspan Stent System with Gateway PTA Balloon Catheter, each under a Humanitarian Device Exemption approval granted by the FDA. The Wingspan Stent System is designed to treat atherosclerotic lesions or accumulated plaque in brain arteries. Designed for the brain fragile vessels, the Wingspan Stent System is a self expanding, nitinol stent sheathed in a delivery system that enables it to reach and open narrowed arteries in the brain. The Wingspan Stent System is currently the only device available in the U.S. for the treatment of intracranial atherosclerotic disease (ICAD) and is indicated for improving cerebral artery lumen diameter in patients with ICAD who are unresponsive to medical therapy. Innovation Our approach to innovation combines internally developed products and technologies with those we may obtain externally through strategic acquisitions and alliances. Our research and development efforts are focused largely on the development of next generation and novel technology offerings across multiple programs and divisions. Since 1995, we have undertaken strategic acquisitions to assemble the lines of business necessary to achieve the critical mass that allows us to continue to be a leader in the medical device industry. We expect to continue to invest in our core franchises, and also investigate opportunities to further expand our presence in, and diversify into, priority growth areas including atrial fibrillation, autonomic modulation therapy, coronary artery disease, deep brain stimulation, diabetes obesity, endoluminal surgery, endoscopic pulmonary intervention, hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, structural heart disease, sudden cardiac arrest, and women health. We have recently announced several acquisitions targeting many of the above conditions and disease states. In 2010, we completed the acquisition of Asthmatx, Inc., and in January 2011, we completed the acquisitions of Sadra Medical, Inc. and Intelect Medical, Inc., and announced the signing of a definitive merger agreement to acquire Atritech, Inc., each discussed above. There can be no assurance that technologies developed internally or acquired through acquisitions and alliances will achieve technological feasibility, obtain regulatory approvals or gain market acceptance, and any delay in the development or approval of these technologies may adversely impact our future growth. Research and Development Our investment in research and development is critical to driving our future growth. We expended $939 million on research and development in 2010, $1035 billion in 2009 and $1006 billion in 2008, representing approximately 12 to 13 percent of our net sales each year. Our investment in research and development reflects regulatory compliance, clinical science, and internal research and development programs, as well as others obtained through our strategic acquisitions and alliances; and sustaining engineering efforts which incorporate customer feedback into continuous improvement efforts for currently marketed and next generation products. We have directed our development efforts toward regulatory compliance and innovative technologies designed to expand current markets or enter new markets. We are looking to transform the way we conduct research and development, leverage low cost geographies, and scrutinize our cost structure, which we expect will generate significant savings over the next 3 years. Our approach to new product design and development is through focused, cross functional teams. We believe that our formal process for technology and product development aids in our ability to offer innovative and manufacturable products in a consistent and timely manner. Involvement of the research and development, clinical, quality, regulatory, manufacturing and marketing teams early in the process is the cornerst1 of our product development cycle. This collaboration allows these teams to concentrate resources on the most viable and clinically relevant new products and technologies, and focus on bringing them to market in a timely and cost effective manner. In addition to internal development, we work with hundreds of leading research institutions, universities and clinicians around the world to develop, evaluate and clinically test our products. We believe our future success will depend upon the strength of these development efforts. 9 Table of Contents Marketing and Sales During 2010, we marketed our products to over 10,000 hospitals, clinics, outpatient facilities and medical offices in nearly 100 countries worldwide. The majority of our net sales are derived from countries in which we have direct sales organizations. A ne2rk of distributors and dealers who offer our products worldwide accounts for our remaining sales. We will continue to leverage our infrastructure in markets where commercially appropriate and use third parties in those markets where it is not economical or strategic to establish or maintain a direct presence. We are not dependent on any single institution and no single institution accounted for more than ten percent of our net sales in 2010 or 2009; however, large group purchasing organizations, hospital ne2rks and other buying groups have become increasingly important to our business and represent a substantial portion of our U.S. net sales. We have a dedicated corporate sales organization in the U.S. focused principally on selling to major buying groups and integrated healthcare ne2rks. We consistently strive to understand and exceed the expectations of our customers. Each of our business groups maintains dedicated sales forces and marketing teams focusing on physicians who specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of different medical conditions. We believe that this focused disease state management enables us to develop highly knowledgeable and dedicated sales representatives and to foster collaborative relationships with physicians. We believe that we have positive working relationships with physicians and others in the medical industry, which enable us to gain a detailed understanding of new therapeutic and diagnostic alternatives and to respond quickly to the changing needs of physicians and their patients. International Operations International net sales accounted for 44 percent of our net sales in 2010. Net sales and operating income attributable to our 2010 geographic regions are presented in Note P Segment Reporting to our 2010 consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Our international structure operates through 3 international business units EMEA, consisting of Europe, the Middle East and Africa; Japan; and Inter Continental, consisting of our Asia Pacific and the Americas reporting units. Maintaining and expanding our international presence is an important comp1nt of our long term growth plan. Through our international presence, we seek to increase net sales and market share, leverage our relationships with leading physicians and their clinical research programs, accelerate the time to bring new products to market, and gain access to worldwide technological developments that we can implement across our product lines. We plan to invest $30 million to $40 million through the end of 2011 to introduce new products and strengthen our sales capabilities in emerging markets such as Brazil, China and India. A discussion of the risks associated with our international operations is included in Item 1A of this Annual Report. As of December 31, 2010, we had six international manufacturing facilities, including 3 in Ireland, 2 in Costa Rica and 1 in Puerto Rico. Approximately 55 percent of our products sold worldwide during 2010 were manufactured at these facilities. Additionally, we maintain international research and development capabilities in Ireland, as well as physician training centers in France and Japan. Manufacturing and Raw Materials We are focused on continuously improving our supply chain effectiveness, strengthening our manufacturing processes and increasing operational efficiencies within our organization. By shifting global manufacturing along product lines, we are able to leverage our existing resources and concentrate on new product development, including the enhancement of existing products, and their commercial launch. We are implementing new systems designed to provide improved quality and reliability, service, greater efficiency and lower supply chain costs, and have substantially increased our focus on process controls and validations, supplier controls, distribution controls and providing our operations teams with the training and tools necessary to drive continuous improvement in product quality. In addition, we continue to focus on examining our operations and general business activities to identify cost improvement opportunities in order to enhance our operational effectiveness, including our Plant Ne2rk Optimization program and our recently completed 2007 Restructuring plan, discussed in Item 7 of this Annual Report. 10 Table of Contents Our products are designed and manufactured in technology centers around the world, either by us or third parties. In most cases, the manufacturing of our products is concentrated in 1 or a few locations. We consistently monitor our inventory levels, manufacturing and distribution capabilities, and maintain recovery plans to address potential disruptions that we may encounter; however, any significant interruption in our ability to manufacture these products over an extended duration may result in delays in our ability to resume production of affected products, due to needs for regulatory approvals. As a result, we may suffer loss of market share, which we may be unable to recapture, and harm to our reputation, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Many comp1nts used in the manufacture of our products are readily fabricated from commonly available raw materials or off the shelf Item available from multiple supply sources. Certain Item are custom made to meet our specifications. We believe that in most cases, redundant capacity exists at our suppliers and that alternative sources of supply are available or could be developed within a reasonable period of time. We also have an on going program to identify single source comp1nts and to develop alternative back up supplies and we regularly re address the adequacy and abilities of our suppliers to meet our needs. However, in certain cases, we may not be able to quickly establish additional or replacement suppliers for specific materials, comp1nts or products, largely due to the regulatory approval system and the complex nature of our manufacturing processes and those of our suppliers. A reduction or interruption in supply, an inability to develop and validate alternative sources if required, or a significant increase in the price of raw materials, comp1nts or products could adversely affect our operations and financial condition, particularly materials or comp1nts related to our CRM products and drug eluting stent systems. In addition, our products require sterilization prior to sale and we utilize a mix of internal resources and third party vendors to perform this service. We believe we have redundant capabilities that are sufficient to sterilize our products; however, to the extent we or our third party sterilizers are unable to sterilize our products, whether due to capacity, regulatory or other constraints, we may be unable to transition to other providers in a timely manner, which could have an adverse impact on our operations. Certain products are manufactured for us by third parties. We are currently reliant on Abbott Laboratories for our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems in the U.S. and Japan. Our supply agreement with Abbott for everolimus eluting stent systems in these regions extends through the end of the second quarter of 2012 At present, we believe that our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems from Abbott, coupled with our current launch plans for our next generation internally developed and manufactured everolimus eluting stent system in these regions, is sufficient to meet customer demand. However, any production or capacity issues that affect Abbott manufacturing capabilities or our process for forecasting, ordering and receiving shipments may impact the ability to increase or decrease our level of supply in a timely manner; therefore, our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott may not align with customer demand, which could have an adverse effect on our operating results. Further, a delay in the launch of our internally developed and manufactured next generation PROMUS Element everolimus eluting stent system in the U.S. and Japan, currently expected in mid 2012, could result in an inability to meet customer demand for everolimus eluting stent systems. We launched our PROMUS Element stent system in our EMEA region and certain Inter Continental countries in the fourth quarter of 2009, quickly gaining market share, exiting 2010 with approximately 1 quarter share of the drug eluting stent market in EMEA. Quality Assurance In January 2006, we received a corporate warning letter from the FDA notifying us of serious regulatory problems at 3 of our facilities and advising us that our corporate wide corrective action plan relating to 3 site specific warning letters issued to us in 2005 was inadequate. We identified solutions to the quality system issues cited by the FDA and implemented those solutions throughout our organization. During 2008, the FDA reinspected a number of our facilities and, in October 2008, informed us that our quality system was in substantial compliance with its Quality System Regulations. In November 2009 and January 2010, the FDA reinspected 2 of our sites to follow up on observations from the 2008 FDA inspections. Both of these FDA inspections confirmed that all issues at the sites have been resolved and all restrictions related to the corporate warning letter were removed. On August 11, 2010, we were notified by the FDA that the corporate warning letter had been lifted. We are committed to providing high quality products to our customers. To meet this commitment, we have implemented updated quality systems and concepts throughout our organization. Our quality system starts with the initial product specification and continues through the design of the product, comp1nt specification process and the manufacturing, sale and servicing of the product. Our quality system is intended to build in quality and process control and to utilize continuous improvement concepts throughout the product life. These systems are designed to enable us to satisfy the various international quality system regulations, including those of the FDA 11 Table of Contents with respect to products sold in the U.S. All of our manufacturing facilities, including our U.S. and European distribution centers, are certified under the ISO134852003 quality system standard, established by the International Standards Organization, for medical devices, which requires, among other Item, an implemented quality system that applies to comp1nt quality, supplier control, product design and manufacturing operations. This certification can be obtained only after a complete audit of a company quality system by an independent outside auditor. Maintenance of the certification requires that these facilities undergo periodic re examination. In addition, we maintain an on going initiative to seek ISO14001 certification at our plants around the world. ISO14001 is a globally recognized standard for Environmental Management Systems, established by the International Standards Organization, which provides a voluntary framework to identify key environmental aspects associated with our business. We engage in continuous environmental performance improvement efforts, and at present, ten of our 14 manufacturing and distribution facilities have attained ISO14001 certification. We are committed to achieving ISO14001 certification at all of our manufacturing facilities and Tier I distribution centers worldwide. Competition We encounter significant competition across our product lines and in each market in which we sell our products from various companies, some of which may have greater financial and marketing resources than we do. Our primary competitors include Johnson & Johnson (including its subsidiary, Cordis Corporation); Medtronic, Inc.; Abbott Laboratories; and St. Jude Medical, Inc.; as well as a wide range of medical device companies that sell a single or limited number of competitive products or participate in only a specific market segment. We also face competition from non medical device companies, such as pharmaceutical companies, which may offer alternative therapies for disease states intended to be treated using our products. We believe that our products compete primarily on their ability to safely and effectively perform diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in a less invasive manner, including clinical outcomes, ease of use, comparative effectiveness, reliability and physician familiarity. In the current environment of managed care, economically motivated buyers, consolidation among healthcare providers, increased competition and declining reimbursement rates, we have been increasingly required to compete on the basis of price, value, reliability and efficiency. We believe the current global economic conditions and healthcare reform measures could put additional competitive pressure on us, including on our average selling prices, overall procedure rates and market sizes. We recognize that our continued competitive success will depend upon our ability to offer products with differentiated clinical outcomes; create or acquire innovative, scientifically advanced technology; apply our technology cost effectively and with superior quality across product lines and markets; develop or acquire proprietary products; attract and retain skilled personnel; obtain patent or other protection for our products; obtain required regulatory and reimbursement approvals; continually enhance our quality systems; manufacture and successfully market our products either directly or through outside parties; and supply sufficient inventory to meet customer demand. Regulatory Environment The medical devices that we manufacture and market are subject to regulation by numerous regulatory bodies, including the FDA and comparable international regulatory agencies. These agencies require manufacturers of medical devices to comply with applicable laws and regulations governing the development, testing, manufacturing, labeling, marketing and distribution of medical devices. Devices are generally subject to varying levels of regulatory control, the most comprehensive of which requires that a clinical evaluation be conducted before a device receives approval for commercial distribution. In the U.S., approval to distribute a new device generally can be met in 1 of 3 ways. The first process requires that a pre market notification (510(k) Submission) be made to the FDA to demonstrate that the device is as safe and effective as, or substantially equivalent to, a legally marketed device that is not subject to pre market approval (PMA), i.e., the predicate device. An appropriate predicate device for a pre market notification is 1 that (i) was legally marketed prior to May 28, 1976, (ii) was approved under a PMA but then subsequently reclassified from Class III to Class II or I, or (iii) has been found to be substantially equivalent and cleared for 12 Table of Contents commercial distribution under a 510(k) Submission. Applicants must submit descriptive data and, when necessary, performance data to establish that the device is substantially equivalent to a predicate device. In some instances, data from human clinical trials must also be submitted in support of a 510(k) Submission. If so, these data must be collected in a manner that conforms to the applicable Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) regulations. The FDA must issue an order finding substantial equivalence before commercial distribution can occur. Changes to existing devices covered by a 510(k) Submission that are not significant can generally be made without additional 510(k) Submissions. Changes that could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device, such as significant changes in designs or materials, may require a new 510(k) with data to support that the modified device remains substantially equivalent. In August 2010, the FDA released numerous draft proposals on the 510(k) process aimed at increasing transparency and streamlining the process, while adding more scientific rigor to the review process. In January 2011, the FDA released the implementation plan for changes to the 510(k) Submission program, which includes additional training of FDA staff, the creation of various guidance documents intended to provide greater clarity to certain processes, as well as various internal changes to the FDA procedures. We have a portfolio of products that includes numerous Class II medical devices. Several of the FDA proposals could increase the regulatory burden on our industry, including those that could increase the cost, complexity and time to market for certain high risk Class II medical devices. The second process requires the submission of an application for PMA to the FDA to demonstrate that the device is safe and effective for its intended use as manufactured. This approval process applies to certain Class III devices. In this case, 2 steps of FDA approval are generally required before marketing in the U.S. can begin. First, we must comply with the applicable IDE regulations in connection with any human clinical investigation of the device in the U.S. Second, the FDA must review our PMA application, which contains, among other things, clinical information acquired under the IDE. The FDA will approve the PMA application if it finds that there is a reasonable assurance that the device is safe and effective for its intended purpose. The third process requires that an application for a Humanitarian Device Exemption (HDE) be made to the FDA for the use of a Humanitarian Use Device (HUD). A HUD is intended to benefit patients by treating or diagnosing a disease or condition that affects, or is manifested in, fewer than 4,000 individuals in the U.S. per year. The application submitted to the FDA for an HDE is similar in both form and content to a PMA application, but is exempt from the effectiveness requirements of a PMA. This approval process demonstrates that there is no comparable device available to treat or diagnose the condition, the device will not expose patients to unreasonable or significant risk, and the benefits to health from use outweigh the risks. The HUD provision of the regulation provides an incentive for the development of devices for use in the treatment or diagnosis of diseases affecting smaller patient populations. The FDA can ban certain medical devices; detain or seize adulterated or misbranded medical devices; order repair, replacement or refund of these devices; and require notification of health professionals and others with regard to medical devices that present unreasonable risks of substantial harm to the public health. The FDA may also enjoin and restrain certain violations of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Safe Medical Devices Act pertaining to medical devices, or initiate action for criminal prosecution of such violations. International sales of medical devices manufactured in the U.S. that are not approved by the FDA for use in the U.S., or that are banned or deviate from lawful performance standards, are subject to FDA export requirements. Exported devices are subject to the regulatory requirements of each country to which the device is exported. Some countries do not have medical device regulations, but in most foreign countries, medical devices are regulated. Frequently, regulatory approval may first be obtained in a foreign country prior to application in the U.S. to take advantage of differing regulatory requirements. Most countries outside of the U.S. require that product approvals be recertified on a regular basis, generally every five years. The recertification process requires that we evaluate any device changes and any new regulations or standards relevant to the device and conduct appropriate testing to document continued compliance. Where recertification applications are required, they must be approved in order to continue selling our products in those countries. In the European Union, we are required to comply with applicable medical device directives (including the Medical Devices Directive and the Active Implantable Medical Devices Directive) and obtain CE Mark certification in order to market medical devices. The CE Mark certification, granted following approval from an independent notified body, is an international symbol of adherence to quality assurance standards and 13 Table of Contents compliance with applicable European Medical Devices Directives. We are also required to comply with other foreign regulations such as the requirement that we obtain approval from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW) before we can launch new products in Japan. The time required to obtain these foreign approvals to market our products may vary from U.S. approvals, and requirements for these approvals may differ from those required by the FDA. We are also subject to various environmental laws, directives and regulations both in the U.S. and abroad. Our operations, like those of other medical device companies, involve the use of substances regulated under environmental laws, primarily in manufacturing and sterilization processes. We do not believe that compliance with environmental laws will have a material impact on our capital expenditures, earnings or competitive position. However, given the scope and nature of these laws, there can be no assurance that environmental laws will not have a material impact on our results of operations. We assess potential environmental contingent liabilities on a regular basis. At present, we are not aware of any such liabilities that would have a material impact on our business. We believe that sound environmental, health and safety performance contributes to our competitive strength while benefiting our customers, shareholders and employees. We are committed to continuous improvement in these areas by reducing pollution, the depletion of natural resources, and our overall environmental footprint. Specifically, we are working to optimize energy and resource usage, ultimately reducing greenhouse gas emissions and waste. We are certified to the FTSE4Good Corporate Social Responsibility Index, managed by The Financial Times and the London Stock Exchange, which measures the performance of companies that meet globally recognized standards of corporate responsibility. This certification recognizes our dedication to those standards, and it places us in a select group of companies with a demonstrated commitment to responsible business practices and sound environmental policies. Government Affairs We maintain a global Government Affairs presence, headquartered in Washington D.C., to actively monitor and influence a myriad of legislative and administrative policies impacting us, both on a domestic and an international front. The Government Affairs office works closely with members of Congress, key Congressional committee staff and White House and Administration staff, which facilitates our active engagement on issues affecting our business. Our proactive approach and depth of political and policy expertise are aimed at having our positions heard by federal, state and global decision makers, while also advancing our business objectives by educating policymakers on our positions, key priorities and the value of our technologies. The Government Affairs office also manages our political action committee and works closely with trade groups on issues affecting our industry and healthcare in general. Healthcare Reform and Current Economic Climate Political, economic and regulatory influences are subjecting the healthcare industry to potential fundamental changes that could substantially affect our results of operations. Government and private sector initiatives to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation, competitive pricing, coverage and payment policies, comparative effectiveness of therapies, technology assessments and managed care arrangements, are continuing in many countries where we do business, including the U.S. These changes are causing the marketplace to put increased emphasis on the delivery of more cost effective treatments. Although we believe our less invasive products and technologies generate favorable clinical outcomes, value and cost efficiency, the resources necessary to demonstrate comparative effectiveness may be significant. In addition, uncertainty remains regarding proposed significant reforms to the U.S. healthcare system. Further, certain state governments have recently enacted, and the federal government has proposed, legislation aimed at increasing transparency in relationships between industry and healthcare professionals (HCPs). As a result, we are required by law to report many types of direct and indirect payments and other transfers of value to HCPs licensed by certain states and expect that we will have to make similar reports at the federal level in the near future. We have devoted substantial time and financial resources in order to develop and implement enhanced structure, policies, systems and processes in order to comply with these legal and regulatory 14 Table of Contents requirements. These systems are designed to provide enhanced visibility and consistency across our businesses with respect to our interactions with healthcare professionals. Implementation of these policies, systems and processes, or failure to comply with these policies could have a negative impact on our results of operations. Additionally, our results of operations could be substantially affected by global economic factors and local operating and economic conditions. Our customers may experience financial difficulties or be unable to borrow m1y to fund their operations which may adversely impact their ability or decision to purchase our products, particularly capital equipment, or to pay for our products they do purchase on a timely basis, if at all. We cannot predict to what extent global economic conditions and the increased focus on healthcare systems and costs in the U.S. and abroad may negatively impact our average selling prices, our net sales and profit margins, procedural volumes and reimbursement rates from third party payors. Third Party Coverage and Reimbursement Our products are purchased principally by hospitals, physicians and other healthcare providers around the world that typically bill various third party payors, including governmental programs (e.g., Medicare and Medicaid), private insurance plans and managed care programs, for the healthcare services provided to their patients. Third party payors may provide or deny coverage for certain technologies and associated procedures based on independently determined assessment criteria. Reimbursement by third party payors for these services is based on a wide range of methodologies that may reflect the services assessed resource costs, clinical outcomes and economic value. These reimbursement methodologies confer different, and sometimes conflicting, levels of financial risk and incentives to healthcare providers and patients, and these methodologies are subject to frequent refinements. Third party payors are also increasingly adjusting reimbursement rates, often downwards, and challenging the prices charged for medical products and services. There can be no assurance that our products will be covered automatically by third party payors, that reimbursement will be available or, if available, that the third party payors coverage policies will not adversely affect our ability to sell our products profitably. Initiatives to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation, are also underway in many countries in which we do business. Implementation of cost containment initiatives and healthcare reforms in significant markets such as the U.S., Japan, Europe and other international markets may limit the price of, or the level at which reimbursement is provided for, our products and may influence a physician selection of products used to treat patients. Proprietary Rights and Patent Litigation We rely on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets and non disclosure agreements to protect our intellectual property. We generally file patent applications in the U.S. and foreign countries where patent protection for our technology is appropriate and available. As of December 31, 2010, we held more than 15,000 patents, and had approximately 9,000 patent applications pending worldwide that cover various aspects of our technology. In addition, we hold exclusive and non exclusive licenses to a variety of third party technologies covered by patents and patent applications. There can be no assurance that pending patent applications will result in the issuance of patents, that patents issued to or licensed by us will not be challenged or circumvented by competitors, or that these patents will be found to be valid or sufficiently broad to protect our technology or to provide us with a competitive advantage. In the aggregate, these intellectual property assets and licenses are of material importance to our business; however, we believe that no single patent, technology, trademark, intellectual property asset or license, except for those relating to our drug eluting coronary stent systems, is material in relation to our business as a whole. We rely on non disclosure and non competition agreements with employees, consultants and other parties to protect, in part, trade secrets and other proprietary technology. There can be no assurance that these agreements will not be breached, that we will have adequate remedies for any breach, that others will not independently develop equivalent proprietary information or that third parties will not otherwise gain access to our trade secrets and proprietary knowledge. 15 Table of Contents There has been substantial litigation regarding patent and other intellectual property rights in the medical device industry, particularly in the areas in which we compete. We continue to defend ourselves against claims and legal actions alleging infringement of the patent rights of others. Adverse determinations in any patent litigation could subject us to significant liabilities to third parties, require us to seek licenses from third parties, and, if licenses are not available, prevent us from manufacturing, selling or using certain of our products, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. Additionally, we may find it necessary to initiate litigation to enforce our patent rights, to protect our trade secrets or know how and to determine the scope and validity of the proprietary rights of others. Patent litigation can be costly and time consuming, and there can be no assurance that our litigation expenses will not be significant in the future or that the outcome of litigation will be favorable to us. Accordingly, we may seek to settle some or all of our pending litigation, particularly to manage risk over time. Settlement may include cross licensing of the patents that are the subject of the litigation as well as our other intellectual property and may involve m1tary payments to or from third parties. See Item 3 and Note L Commitments and Contingencies to our 2010 consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of intellectual property and other litigation and proceedings in which we are involved. In management opinion, we are not currently involved in any legal proceeding other than those specifically identified in Note L, which, individually or in the aggregate, could have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. Risk Management The testing, marketing and sale of human healthcare products entails an inherent risk of product liability claims. In the normal course of business, product liability and securities claims are asserted against us. Product liability and securities claims may be asserted against us in the future related to events unknown at the present time. We are substantially self insured with respect to product liability and intellectual property infringement claims. We maintain insurance policies providing limited coverage against securities claims. The absence of significant third party insurance coverage increases our potential exposure to unanticipated claims or adverse decisions. Product liability claims, securities and commercial litigation and other litigation in the future, regardless of outcome, could have a material adverse effect on our business. We believe that our risk management practices, including limited insurance coverage, are reasonably adequate to protect against anticipated product liability and securities litigation losses. However, unanticipated catastrophic losses could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations and liquidity. Employees As of December 31, 2010, we had approximately 25,000 employees, including approximately 13,000 in operations; 6,000 in selling, marketing and distribution; 4,000 in clinical, regulatory and research and development; and 2,000 in administration. Of these employees, we employed approximately 10,000 outside the U.S., approximately 7,000 of whom are in the operations function. We believe that the continued success of our business will depend, in part, on our ability to attract and retain qualified personnel, and we are committed to developing our people and providing them with opportunities to contribute to our growth and success. Community Outreach In line with our corporate mission to improve the quality of patient care and the productivity of healthcare delivery, we are committed to making more possible in the communities where we live and work. We bring this commitment to life by supporting global, national and local health and education initiatives, striving to improve patient advocacy, adhering to strong ethical standards that deliver on our commitments, and minimizing our impact on the environment. A prominent example of our ongoing commitment to patients is our Close the Gap program, which addresses disparities in cardiovascular care for the underserved patient populations of women, black Americans, and Latino Americans. Close the Gap increases awareness of cardiovascular risk factors, teaches healthcare providers about cultural beliefs and barriers to treatment, and advocates for measures that help ensure all patients receive the cardiovascular care they need. 16 Table of Contents Through the Boston Scientific Foundation, we fund non profit organizations in our local communities and medical education fellowships at institutions throughout the U.S. Our community grants support programs aimed at improving the lives of those with unmet needs by engaging in partnerships that promote long term, systemic change. The Foundation is committed to funding organizations focused on increasing access to quality healthcare and improving educational opportunities, particularly with regards to science, technology, engineering and math. We have committed to contributing $15 million to our Close the Gap program and Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) education over the next 3 years. Seasonality Our worldwide sales do not reflect any significant degree of seasonality; however, customer purchases have historically been lighter in the third quarter of the year, as compared to other quarters. This reflects, among other factors, lower demand during summer months, particularly in European countries. Available Information Copies of our Annual Report on Form 10 K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 are available free of charge on our website (www.bostonscientific.com) as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file the material with or furnish it to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Printed copies of these posted materials are also available free of charge to shareholders who request them in writing from Investor Relations, 1 Boston Scientific Place, Natick, MA 01760 1537. Information on our website or connected to our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report. Safe Harbor for Forward Looking Statements Certain statements that we may make from time to time, including statements contained in this report and information incorporated by reference into this report, constitute forward looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Forward looking statements may be identified by words like anticipate, expect, project, believe, plan, may, estimate, intend and similar words. These forward looking statements are based on our beliefs, assumptions and estimates using information available to us at the time and are not intended to be guarantees of future events or performance. These forward looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding our financial performance; our growth strategy; our intentions and expectations regarding our business strategy; the completion of planned acquisitions, divestitures and strategic investments, as well as integration of acquired businesses; our ability to successfully separate our Neurovascular business; the timing and impact of our restructuring initiatives, expected costs and cost savings; our intention not to pay dividends and to instead use our cash flow to repay debt and invest in our business; changes in the market and our market share; product development and iterations; timing of regulatory approvals; our regulatory and quality compliance; expected research and development efforts and the reallocation of research and development expenditures; new and existing product launches, including their timing in new geographies and their impact on our market share and financial position; our sales and marketing strategy and our investments in our sales organization; reimbursement practices; our market position in the marketplace for our products; our initiatives regarding plant certifications and reductions; the ability of our suppliers and sterilizers to meet our requirements; our ability to meet customer demand for our products; the effect of new accounting pronouncements on our financial results; competitive pressures; the impact of new or recently enacted excise taxes; the effect of proposed tax laws; the outcome of matters before taxing authorities; our tax position; intellectual property, governmental proceedings and litigation matters; anticipated expenses and capital expenditures and our ability to finance them; and our ability to meet the financial covenants required by our term loan and revolving credit facility, or to renegotiate the terms of or obtain waivers for compliance with those covenants. If our underlying assumptions turn out to be incorrect, or if certain risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from the expectations and projections expressed or implied by our forward looking statements. As a result, readers are cauti1d not to place undue reliance on any of our forward looking statements. 17 Table of Contents Except as required by law, we do not intend to update any forward looking statements even if new information becomes available or other events occur in the future. We have identified these forward looking statements, which are based on certain risks and uncertainties, including the risk factors described in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in forward looking statements are contained below and described further in Item 1A. CRM Business Our ability to minimize loss of and recapture market share following the ship hold and product removal of our ICD and CRT D systems in the U.S.; Our ability to retain and attract key members of our CRM sales force and other key CRM personnel, particularly following the ship hold and product removal of our ICD and CRT D systems in the U.S.; Our estimates for the U.S. and worldwide CRM markets, as well as our ability to increase CRM net sales and recapture market share; The overall performance of, and referring physician, implanting physician and patient confidence in, our and our competitors CRM products and technologies, including our COGNIS CRT D and TELIGEN ICD systems and our LATITUDE Patient Management System; The results of CRM clinical trials and market studies undertaken by us, our competitors or other third parties; Our ability to successfully launch next generation products and technology features worldwide, including our INGENIO pacemaker system and our next generation INCEPTA , ENERGEN and PUNCTUA defibrillators in additional geographies; Our ability to grow sales of both new and replacement implant units; Competitive offerings in the CRM market and related declines in average selling prices, as well as the timing of receipt of regulatory approvals to market existing and anticipated CRM products and technologies; and Our ability to avoid disruption in the supply of certain comp1nts, materials or products; or to quickly secure additional or replacement comp1nts, materials or products on a timely basis. Coronary Stent Business Volatility in the coronary stent market, our estimates for the worldwide coronary stent market, our ability to increase coronary stent system net sales, competitive offerings and the timing of receipt of regulatory approvals, both in the U.S. and internationally, to market existing and anticipated drug eluting stent technology and other stent platforms; Our ability to successfully launch next generation products and technology features, including our PROMUS Element and TAXUS Element stent systems in additional geographies; The results of coronary stent clinical trials undertaken by us, our competitors or other third parties; Our ability to maintain or expand our worldwide market positions through reinvestment in our 2 drug eluting stent programs; Our ability to manage the mix of net sales of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott relative to our total drug eluting stent system net sales and to launch on schedule in the U.S. and Japan our PROMUS Element next generation internally developed and manufactured everolimus eluting stent system with gross profit margins more comparable to our TAXUS stent systems; 18 Table of Contents Our share of the U.S. and worldwide drug eluting stent markets, the average number of stents used per procedure, average selling prices, and the penetration rate of drug eluting stent technology in the U.S. and international markets; The overall performance of, and continued physician confidence in, our and other drug eluting stent systems; Our reliance on Abbott manufacturing capabilities and supply chain in the U.S. and Japan, and our ability to align our everolimus eluting stent system supply from Abbott with customer demand in these regions; Enhanced requirements to obtain regulatory approval in the U.S. and around the world and the associated impact on new product launch schedules and the cost of product approval and compliance; and Our ability to retain and attract key members of our cardiology sales force and other key personnel. Other Businesses The overall performance of, and continued physician confidence in, our products and technologies; Our ability to successfully launch next generation products and technology features in a timely manner; The results of clinical trials undertaken by us, our competitors or other third parties; and Our ability to maintain or expand our worldwide market positions through investments in next generation technologies. Litigation and Regulatory Compliance Risks generally associated with our regulatory compliance and quality systems in the U.S. and around the world; Our ability to minimize or avoid future field actions or FDA warning letters relating to our products and the on going inherent risk of potential physician advisories or field actions related to medical devices; Heightened global regulatory enforcement arising from political and regulatory changes as well as economic pressures; The effect of our litigation and risk management practices, including self insurance, and compliance activities on our loss contingencies, legal provision and cash flows; The impact of, diversion of management attention, and costs to resolve, our stockholder derivative and class action, patent, product liability, contract and other litigation, governmental investigations and legal proceedings; Costs associated with our on going compliance and quality activities and sustaining organizations; The impact of increased pressure on the availability and rate of third party reimbursement for our products and procedures worldwide; and Legislative or regulatory efforts to modify the product approval or reimbursement process, including a trend toward demonstrating clinical outcomes, comparative effectiveness and cost efficiency. 19 Table of Contents Innovation Our ability to complete planned clinical trials successfully, to obtain regulatory approvals and to develop and launch products on a timely basis within cost estimates, including the successful completion of in process projects from purchased research and development; Our ability to manage research and development and other operating expenses consistent with our expected net sales growth; Our ability to develop and launch next generation products and technologies successfully across all of our businesses; Our ability to fund with cash or common stock any acquisitions or alliances, or to fund contingent payments associated with these acquisitions or alliances; Our ability to achieve benefits from our focus on internal research and development and external alliances and acquisitions as well as our ability to capitalize on opportunities across our businesses; Our failure to succeed at, or our decision to discontinue, any of our growth initiatives, as well as competitive interest in the same or similar technologies; Our ability to integrate the strategic acquisitions we have consummated or may consummate in the future; Our ability to prioritize our internal research and development project portfolio and our external investment portfolio to identify profitable revenue growth opportunities and keep expenses in line with expected revenue levels, or our decision to sell, discontinue, write down or reduce the funding of any of these projects; The timing, size and nature of strategic initiatives, market opportunities and research and development platforms available to us and the ultimate cost and success of these initiatives; and Our ability to successfully identify, develop and market new products or the ability of others to develop products or technologies that render our products or technologies noncompetitive or obsolete. International Markets Our dependency on international net sales to achieve growth; Changes in our international structure and leadership; Risks associated with international operations, including compliance with local legal and regulatory requirements as well as changes in reimbursement practices and policies; Our ability to maintain or expand our worldwide market positions through investments in emerging markets; The potential effect of foreign currency fluctuations and interest rate fluctuations on our net sales, expenses and resulting margins; and Uncertainties related to economic conditions. Liquidity Our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to fund operations, capital expenditures, litigation settlements 20 Table of Contents and strategic investments and acquisitions, as well as to effectively manage our debt levels and covenant compliance; Our ability to access the public and private capital markets when desired and to issue debt or equity securities on terms reasonably acceptable to us; Our ability to resolve open tax matters favorably and realize substantially all of our deferred tax assets and the impact of changes in tax laws; and The impact of examinations and assessments by domestic and international taxing authorities on our tax provision, financial condition or results of operations. Strategic Initiatives Our ability to implement, fund, and achieve timely and sustainable cost improvement measures consistent with our expectations, including our 2010 Restructuring plan and Plant Ne2rk Optimization program; Our ability to maintain or expand our worldwide market positions in the various markets in which we compete or seek to compete, as we diversify our product portfolio and focus on emerging markets; Risks associated with significant changes made or to be made to our organizational structure pursuant to our 2010 Restructuring plan and Plant Ne2rk Optimization program, or to the membership and responsibilities of our executive committee or Board of Directors; Our ability to direct our research and development efforts to conduct more cost effective clinical studies, accelerate the time to bring new products to market, and develop products with higher returns; The successful separation of divested businesses, including the performance of related transition services; Our ability to retain and attract key employees and avoid business disruption and employee distraction as we execute our global compliance program, restructuring plans and divestitures of assets or businesses; and Our ability to maintain management focus on core business activities while also concentrating on implementing strategic and restructuring initiatives. Several important factors, in addition to the specific risk factors discussed in connection with forward looking statements individually and the risk factors described in Item 1A under the heading Risk Factors, could affect our future results and growth rates and could cause those results and rates to differ materially from those expressed in the forward looking statements and the risk factors contained in this report. These additional factors include, among other things, future economic, competitive, reimbursement and regulatory conditions; new product introductions; demographic trends; intellectual property, litigation and government investigations; financial market conditions; and future business decisions made by us and our competitors, all of which are difficult or impossible to predict accurately and many of which are beyond our control. Therefore, we wish to caution each reader of this report to consider carefully these factors as well as the specific factors discussed with each forward looking statement and risk factor in this report and as disclosed in our filings with the SEC. These factors, in some cases, have affected and in the future (together with other factors) could affect our ability to implement our business strategy and may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by the statements expressed in this Annual Report. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS In addition to the other information contained in this Annual Report and the exhibits hereto, the following risk factors should be considered carefully in evaluating our business. Our business, financial condition, cash flows or 21 Table of Contents results of operations could be materially adversely affected by any of these risks. This section contains forward looking statements. You should refer to the explanation of the qualifications and limitations on forward looking statements set forth at the end of Item 1 of this Annual Report. Additional risks not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash flows or results of operations. We face various risks and uncertainties as a result of the ship hold and removal of field inventory of all implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT D) systems offered by our Cardiac Rhythm Management (CRM) business in the U.S., which we announced on March 15, 2010. Those risks and uncertainties include harm to our business, reputation, financial condition and results of operations. On March 15, 2010, we announced the ship hold and removal of field inventory of all ICD systems and CRT D systems offered by our CRM division in the U.S., after determining that certain instances of changes in the manufacturing process related to these products were not submitted for approval to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). We have since submitted the required documentation and, on April 15, 2010, we resumed U.S. distribution of our COGNIS CRT D systems and TELIGEN ICD systems, and, on May 21, 2010, we resumed U.S. distribution of all of our remaining CRT D and ICD devices, in each case following required FDA clearance. As a result of these actions, we have suffered and may continue to suffer loss of market share for these products in the U.S. While we continue to work on recapturing lost market share, our on going net sales and results of operations will likely continue to be negatively impacted. We may be unable to minimize this impact, or to offset with the release of future products, and we may suffer on going harm to our reputation, among other risks and uncertainties, each of which may have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Declines in average selling prices for our products, particularly our drug eluting coronary stent systems, may materially adversely affect our results of operations. We have experienced pricing pressures across many of our businesses due to competitive activity, increased market power of our customers as the healthcare industry consolidates, economic pressures experienced by our customers, and the impact of managed care organizations and other third party payors. Competitive pricing pressures, including aggressive pricing offered by market entrants, have particularly affected our drug eluting coronary stent system offerings. We estimate that the average selling price of our drug eluting stent systems in the U.S. decreased nine percent in 2010 as compared to the prior year. Continued declines in average selling prices of our products due to pricing pressures may have an adverse impact on our results of operations. We derive a significant portion of our net sales from the sale of drug eluting coronary stent systems and CRM products. Declines in market size, average selling prices, procedural volumes, and our share of the markets in which we compete; increased competition; market perceptions of studies published by third parties; interruption in supply of everolimus eluting stent systems in the U.S. and Japan; changes in our sales personnel; or product launch delays may materially adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition, including potential future write offs of our goodwill and other intangible assets balances. Net sales from drug eluting coronary stent systems represented approximately 20 percent of our consolidated net sales during 2010. In 2010, lower average selling prices driven by competitive and other pricing pressures resulted in a decline in our share of the U.S. drug eluting stent market, as well as an overall decrease in the size of the market. Recent competitive launches and clinical trial enrollment limiting our access to certain drug eluting stent system customers negatively impacted our share of the worldwide drug eluting stent market. There can be no assurance that these and other factors will not further impact our share of the U.S. or worldwide drug eluting stent markets, that we will regain share of the U.S. or worldwide drug eluting stent markets, or that the size of the U.S. drug eluting stent market will reach previous levels or will not decline further, all of which could materially adversely affect our results of operations or financial condition. In addition, we expect to launch our internally developed and manufactured next generation everolimus eluting stent system, the PROMUS Element platinum chromium coronary stent system, in the U.S. and Japan in mid 2012, and we expect to launch our next generation TAXUS Element stent system in the U.S. in mid 2011 and Japan in late 2011 or early 2012 A delay in the timing of the launch of next generation products may result in a further decline in our market share and have an adverse impact on our results of operations. 22 Table of Contents We share, with Abbott Laboratories, rights to everolimus eluting stent technology, and are reliant on Abbott for our supply of PROMUS everolimus eluting stent systems in the U.S. and Japan. Any production or capacity issues that affect Abbott manufacturing capabilities or our process for forecasting, ordering and receiving shipments may impact our ability to increase or decrease the level of supply to us in a timely manner; therefore, our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott may not align with customer demand. Our supply agreement for the PROMUS stent system from Abbott extends through the end of the second quarter of 2012 in the U.S. and Japan. Our inability to obtain regulatory approval and timely launch our PROMUS Element stent system in these regions could result in an inability to meet customer demand for everolimus eluting stent systems and may materially adversely affect our results of operations or financial condition. Net sales from our CRM group represented approximately 28 percent of our consolidated net sales in 2010. Worldwide CRM market growth rates, including the U.S. ICD market, remain low. Further, physician reaction to study results published by the Journal of the American Medical Association regarding evidence based guidelines for ICD implants and the U.S. Department of Justice investigation into ICD implants may have a negative impact on the size of the CRM market. Our U.S. ICD sales represented approximately 48 percent of our worldwide CRM net sales in 2010, and any changes in this market could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. We have suffered, and may continue to suffer, loss of net sales and market share in the U.S. due to the ship hold and removal of field inventory of all of our ICDs and CRT Ds offered in the U.S., which we announced on March 15, 2010. There can be no assurance that the size of the CRM market will increase above existing levels or that we will be able to increase CRM market share or increase net sales in a timely manner, if at all. Decreases in market size or our share of the CRM market and decreases in net sales from our CRM products could have a significant impact on our financial condition or results of operations. In addition, our inability to increase our worldwide CRM net sales could result in future goodwill and other intangible asset impairment charges. We expect to launch our next generation wireless pacemaker in our Europe Middle East Africa (EMEA) region and certain Inter Continental countries during the second half of 2011, and in the U.S. in late 2011 or early 2012 Variability in the timing of the launch of next generation products may result in excess or expired inventory positions and future inventory charges, which may result in a loss of market share and adversely impact our results of operations. The profit margin of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott Laboratories, including any improvements or iterations approved for sale during the term of the applicable supply arrangements and of the type that could be approved by a supplement to an approved FDA pre market approval, is significantly lower than that of our TAXUS stent systems, TAXUS Element stent systems and PROMUS Element stent systems, and an increase in sales of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott relative to TAXUS stent system, TAXUS Element stent system and PROMUS Element stent system net sales may continue to adversely impact our gross profit and operating profit margins. The price we pay Abbott for our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott is further impacted by our arrangements with Abbott and is subject to retroactive adjustment, which may also negatively impact our profit margins. As a result of the terms of our supply arrangement with Abbott, the gross profit and operating profit margin of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott, including any improvements or iterations approved for sale during the term of the applicable supply arrangements and of the type that could be approved by a supplement to an approved FDA pre market approval, are significantly lower than that of our TAXUS stent system, TAXUS Element stent system and PROMUS Element stent system. Therefore, if sales of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott continue to increase in relation to our total drug eluting stent system sales, our profit margins will continue to decrease. Further, the price we pay for our supply of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott is determined by our contracts with Abbott. Our cost is based, in part, on previously fixed estimates of Abbott manufacturing costs for everolimus eluting stent systems and third party reports of our average selling price of these stent systems. Amounts paid pursuant to this pricing arrangement are subject to a retroactive adjustment approximately every 2 years based on their actual costs to manufacture these stent systems for us and our average selling price of everolimus eluting stent systems supplied to us by Abbott. Pursuant to these adjustments, we may make a payment to Abbott based on the differences between their actual manufacturing costs and the contractually stipulated manufacturing costs and differences between our actual average selling price and third party reports of our average selling price, in each 23 Table of Contents case, with respect to our purchases of everolimus eluting stent systems from Abbott. As a result, our profit margins in the years in which we record payments related to purchases of everolimus eluting stent systems from Abbott may decrease. Consolidation in the healthcare industry could lead to increased demands for price concessions or the exclusion of some suppliers from certain of our significant market segments, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. The cost of healthcare has risen significantly over the past decade and numerous initiatives and reforms by legislators, regulators and third party payors to curb these costs have resulted in a consolidation trend in the healthcare industry, including hospitals. This consolidation has resulted in greater pricing pressures, decreased average selling prices, and the exclusion of certain suppliers from important market segments as group purchasing organizations, independent delivery ne2rks and large single accounts continue to consolidate purchasing decisions for some of our hospital customers. While our strategic initiatives include measures to address these trends, there can be no assurance that these measures will succeed. We expect that market demand, government regulation, third party reimbursement policies, government contracting requirements, and societal pressures will continue to change the worldwide healthcare industry, resulting in further business consolidations and alliances among our customers and competitors, which may reduce competition and continue to exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products and adversely impact our business, financial condition or results of operations. We face intense competition and may not be able to keep pace with the rapid technological changes in the medical devices industry, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. The medical device markets in which we primarily participate are highly competitive. We encounter significant competition across our product lines and in each market in which our products are sold from various medical device companies, some of which may have greater financial and marketing resources than we do. Our primary competitors include Johnson & Johnson (including its subsidiary, Cordis Corporation); Medtronic, Inc.; Abbott Laboratories; and St. Jude Medical, Inc.; as well as a wide range of companies that sell a single or a limited number of competitive products or which participate in only a specific market segment. We also face competition from non medical device companies, including pharmaceutical companies, which may offer alternative therapies for disease states intended to be treated using our products. Additionally, the medical device market is characterized by extensive research and development, and rapid technological change. Developments by other companies of new or improved products, processes or technologies may make our products or proposed products obsolete or less competitive and may negatively impact our net sales. We are required to devote continued efforts and financial resources to develop or acquire scientifically advanced technologies and products, apply our technologies cost effectively across product lines and markets, attract and retain skilled development personnel, obtain patent and other protection for our technologies and products, obtain required regulatory and reimbursement approvals and successfully manufacture and market our products consistent with our quality standards. If we fail to develop new products or enhance existing products, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Because we derive a significant amount of our net sales from international operations and a significant percentage of our future growth is expected to come from international operations, changes in international economic or regulatory conditions could have a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Sales outside the U.S. accounted for approximately 44 percent of our net sales in 2010. Additionally, a significant percentage of our future growth is expected to come from international operations, including from investments in emerging markets such as Brazil, China and India. As a result, our sales growth and operating profits from our international operations may be limited by risks and uncertainties related to economic conditions in these regions, foreign currency fluctuations, interest rate fluctuations, regulatory and reimbursement approvals, competitive offerings, infrastructure development, rights to intellectual property and our ability to implement our overall business strategy. Further, international markets are also being affected by economic pressure to contain 24 Table of Contents reimbursement levels and healthcare costs; and international markets may also be impacted by foreign government efforts to understand healthcare practices and pricing in other countries, which could result in increased pricing transparency across geographies and pressure to harmonize reimbursement and ultimately reduce the selling prices of our products. Certain foreign governments may allow favorable reimbursements for locally manufactured products, which may put us at a competitive disadvantage and negatively affect our market share. The trend in countries around the world, including Japan, toward more stringent regulatory requirements for product clearance, changing reimbursement models and more rigorous inspection and enforcement activities has generally caused or may cause medical device manufacturers to experience more uncertainty, delay, risk and expense. In addition, most international jurisdictions have adopted regulatory approval and periodic renewal requirements for medical devices, and we must comply with these requirements in order to market our products in these jurisdictions. Any significant changes in the competitive, political, legal, regulatory, reimbursement or economic environment where we conduct international operations may have a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We have recently realigned our international structure and are devoting resources to focus on increasing net sales in emerging markets. Sales practices in certain international markets may be inconsistent with our desired business practices and U.S. legal requirements, which may impact our ability to expand as planned. We incurred substantial indebtedness in connection with our acquisition of Guidant and if we are unable to manage our debt levels, it could have an adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. We had total debt of $5.438 billion as of December 31, 2010, attributable in large part to our 2006 acquisition of Guidant Corporation. During 2010, we completed the refinancing of the majority of our 2011 debt maturities, establishing a $10 billion term loan and syndicating a new $20 billion revolving credit facility, and prepaid in full our $900 million loan from Abbott Laboratories and all $600 million of our senior notes due in June 2011 Additionally, in January 2011, we prepaid $250 million of our senior notes due in January 2011 and borrowed $250 million under our credit and security facility secured by our U.S. trade receivables, using the proceeds to pre pay all $100 million of our 2011 term loan maturities and $150 million of our 2012 term loan maturities. As part of our strategy to increase operational leverage and continue to strengthen our financial flexibility, we are continuing to assess opportunities for improved operational effectiveness and efficiency, closed the sale of our Neurovascular business and implemented other strategic initiatives to generate proceeds that would be available for debt repayment. There can be no assurance that we will be able to repay our indebtedness. Further, certain of our current credit ratings are below investment grade and our inability to regain investment grade credit ratings could increase our cost of borrowing funds in the future. Any disruption in our cash flow or our ability to effectively manage our debt levels could have an adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. In addition, our term loan and revolving credit facility agreement contains financial covenants that require us to maintain specified financial ratios. If we are unable to satisfy these covenants, we may be required to obtain waivers from our lenders and no assurance can be made that our lenders would grant such waivers on favorable terms or at all, and we could be required to repay any borrowings under this facility on demand. We may record future goodwill impairment charges related to 1 or more of our business units, which could materially adversely impact our results of operations. We test our April 1 goodwill balances for impairment during the second quarter of each year, or more frequently if indicators are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist. We assess goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level and, in evaluating the potential for impairment of goodwill, we make assumptions regarding estimated revenue projections, growth rates, cash flows and discount rates. In 2010, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $1817 billion associated with our U.S. CRM reporting unit. In addition, as a result of signing of a definitive agreement to sell our Neurovascular business, we performed an interim impairment test on our international reporting units, excluding the assets of that business, and determined that the remaining goodwill balances were not impaired. However, we have identified four reporting units with a material amount of goodwill that are at higher risk of potential failure of the first step of the impairment test in future reporting periods. These reporting units include our U.S. CRM unit, our U.S. Cardiovascular unit, our U.S. Neuromodulation unit, and our EMEA region, which together hold approximately $9 billion of allocated goodwill. Although we use consistent methodologies in developing the assumptions and estimates underlying the fair value calculations used in our impairment tests, these estimates are uncertain by nature and 25 Table of Contents can vary from actual results. For each of these reporting units, relatively small declines in the future performance and cash flows of the reporting unit or small changes in other key assumptions may result future goodwill impairment charges, which could materially adversely impact our results of operations. Failure to integrate acquired businesses into our operations successfully could adversely affect our business. As part of our strategy to realign our business portfolio, we have recently completed or announced several acquisitions and may pursue additional acquisitions in the future. Our integration of the operations of acquired businesses requires significant efforts, including the coordination of information technologies, research and development, sales and marketing, operations, manufacturing and finance. These efforts result in additional expenses and involve significant amounts of management time. Factors that will affect the success of our acquisitions include the strength of the acquired companies underlying technology and ability to execute, results of clinical trials, regulatory approvals and reimbursement levels of the acquired products and related procedures, our ability to adequately fund acquired in process research and development projects and retain key employees, and our ability to achieve synergies with our acquired companies, such as increasing sales of our products, achieving cost savings and effectively combining technologies to develop new products. Our failure to manage successfully and coordinate the growth of the combined acquired companies could have an adverse impact on our business. In addition, we cannot be certain that the businesses we acquire will become profitable or remain so and if our acquisitions are not successful, we may record related asset impairment charges in the future. We may not be successful in our strategy relating to future strategic acquisitions of, investments in, or alliances with, other companies and businesses, which have been a significant source of historical growth for us, and will be key to our diversification into new markets and technologies. Our strategic acquisitions, investments and alliances are intended to further expand our ability to offer customers effective, high quality medical devices that satisfy their interventional needs. If we are unsuccessful in our acquisitions, investments and alliances, we may be unable to grow our business. These acquisitions, investments and alliances have been a significant source of our growth. The success of our strategy relating to future acquisitions, investments or alliances will depend on a number of factors, including our ability to identify suitable opportunities for acquisition, investment or alliance, if at all; our ability to finance any future acquisition, investment or alliance on terms acceptable to us, if at all; whether we are able to establish an acquisition, investment or alliance on terms that are satisfactory to us, if at all; and intellectual property and litigation related to these technologies. Any potential future acquisitions we consummate may be dilutive to our earnings and may require additional debt or equity financing, depending on size or nature. We may not realize the expected benefits from our restructuring and Plant Ne2rk Optimization initiatives; our long term expense reduction programs may result in an increase in short term expense; and our efforts may lead to additional unintended consequences. In February 2010, we announced our 2010 Restructuring plan designed to strengthen and position us for long term success. Key activities under the plan include the integration of our Cardiovascular and CRM businesses, as well as the restructuring of certain other businesses and corporate functions; the centralization of our research and development organization; the realignment of our international structure; and the reprioritization and diversification of our product portfolio. In connection with this plan and our strategy to reduce risk, increase operational leverage, realign our business portfolio and accelerate profitable revenue growth, we recently closed the sale of our Neurovascular business and may explore opportunities to divest additional select businesses or assets in the future. However, our ability to complete further divestitures may be limited by the inability to locate a buyer or to agree to terms that are favorable to us. Additionally, in January 2009, we announced our Plant Ne2rk 26 Table of Contents Optimization program, aimed at simplifying our plant ne2rk, reducing our manufacturing costs and improving gross margins. Cost reduction initiatives under both plans include cost improvement measures, including resource reallocations, head count reductions, the sale of certain non strategic assets and efforts to streamline our business, among other actions. These measures could yield unintended consequences, such as distraction of our management and employees, business disruption, attrition beyond our planned reduction in workforce and reduced employee productivity. We may be unable to attract or retain key personnel. Attrition beyond our planned reduction in workforce or a material decrease in employee morale or productivity could negatively affect our business, sales, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, head count reductions may subject us to the risk of litigation, which could result in substantial cost. Moreover, our expense reduction programs result in charges and expenses that impact our operating results. We cannot guarantee that these measures, or other expense reduction measures we take in the future, will result in the expected cost savings. The divestiture of our Neurovascular business could pose significant risks and may materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results. As part of our strategy to realign our business portfolio, in January 2011, we closed the sale of our Neurovascular business to Stryker Corporation. The divestiture of this business may involve a number of risks, including the diversion of management and employee attention and significant costs and expenses, particularly unexpected costs and delays occurring during the period of separation. In addition, we will provide post closing services through a transition services agreement, and will also supply products to Stryker. These transition services and supply agreements are expected to be effective for a period of approximately 24 months following the closing of the transaction, subject to extension, and could involve the expenditure of significant employee resources, among other resources, and under which we will be reliant on third parties for the provision of services. Our inability to effectively manage the post separation activities and events could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. Current economic conditions could adversely affect our results of operations. The recent global financial crisis caused extreme disruption in the financial markets, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability. There can be no assurance that there will not be further deterioration in the global economy. Our customers may experience financial difficulties or be unable to borrow m1y to fund their operations which may adversely impact their ability or decision to purchase our products, particularly capital equipment, or to pay for our products they do purchase on a timely basis, if at all. For example, our net sales have been adversely impacted by reductions in procedural volumes due to unemployment levels and other economic factors, and these reductions may continue. Further, we have experienced significant delays in the collectability of receivables in certain international countries and there can be no assurance that these payments will ultimately be collected. Conditions in the financial markets and other factors beyond our control may also adversely affect our ability to borrow m1y in the credit markets and to obtain financing for acquisitions or other general corporate and commercial purposes. The strength and timing of any economic recovery remains uncertain, and we cannot predict to what extent the global economic slowdown may negatively impact our average selling prices, our net sales and profit margins, procedural volumes and reimbursement rates from third party payors. In addition, current economic conditions may adversely affect our suppliers, leading them to experience financial difficulties or to be unable to borrow m1y to fund their operations, which could cause disruptions in our ability to produce our products. Healthcare policy changes, including recently passed healthcare reform legislation, may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Political, economic and regulatory influences are subjecting the healthcare industry to potential fundamental changes that could substantially affect our results of operations. Government and private sector initiatives to limit the growth of healthcare costs, including price regulation, competitive pricing, coverage and payment policies, comparative effectiveness of therapies, technology assessments and managed care arrangements, are continuing in many countries where we do business, including the U.S. These changes are causing the marketplace to put increased emphasis on the delivery of more cost effective treatments. Our strategic initiatives include measures to address this trend; however, there can be no assurance that any of our strategic measures will successfully address this trend. 27 Table of Contents The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Affordability Reconciliation Act of 2010 were enacted into law in the U.S. in March 2010. As a U.S. headquartered company with significant sales in the U.S., this healthcare reform legislation will materially impact us. Certain provisions of the legislation will not be effective for a number of years, there are many programs and requirements for which the details have not yet been fully established or consequences not fully understood, and it is unclear what the full impact of the legislation will be. The legislation imposes on medical device manufacturers a 23 percent excise tax on U.S. sales of Class I, II and III medical devices beginning in 2013 U.S. net sales represented 56 percent of our worldwide net sales in 2010 and, therefore, this tax burden may have a material, negative impact on our results of operations and our cash flows. Other provisions of this legislation, including Medicare provisions aimed at improving quality and decreasing costs, comparative effectiveness research, an independent payment advisory board, and pilot programs to evaluate alternative payment methodologies, could meaningfully change the way healthcare is developed and delivered, and may adversely affect our business and results of operations. Further, we cannot predict what healthcare programs and regulations will be ultimately implemented at the federal or state level, or the effect of any future legislation or regulation in the U.S. or internationally. However, any changes that lower reimbursements for our products or reduce medical procedure volumes could adversely affect our business and results of operations. Healthcare cost containment pressures and legislative or administrative reforms resulting in restrictive reimbursement practices of third party payors or preferences for alternate therapies could decrease the demand for our products, the prices which customers are willing to pay for those products and the number of procedures performed using our devices, which could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Our products are purchased principally by hospitals, physicians and other healthcare providers around the world that typically bill various third party payors, including governmental programs (e.g., Medicare and Medicaid), private insurance plans and managed care programs, for the healthcare services provided to their patients. The ability of customers to obtain appropriate reimbursement for their products and services from private and governmental third party payors is critical to the success of medical technology companies. The availability of reimbursement affects which products customers purchase and the prices they are willing to pay. Reimbursement varies from country to country and can significantly impact the acceptance of new products and services. After we develop a promising new product, we may find limited demand for the product unless reimbursement approval is obtained from private and governmental third party payors. Further legislative or administrative reforms to the reimbursement systems in the U.S., Japan, or other international countries in a manner that significantly reduces reimbursement for procedures using our medical devices or denies coverage for those procedures, including price regulation, competitive pricing, coverage and payment policies, comparative effectiveness of therapies, technology assessments and managed care arrangements, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Major third party payors for hospital services in the U.S. and abroad continue to work to contain healthcare costs. The introduction of cost containment incentives, combined with closer scrutiny of healthcare expenditures by both private health insurers and employers, has resulted in increased discounts and contractual adjustments to hospital charges for services performed, has lead to increased physician employment by hospitals in the U.S., and has shifted services between inpatient and outpatient settings. Initiatives to limit the increase of healthcare costs, including price regulation, are also underway in several countries in which we do business. Hospitals or physicians may respond to these cost containment pressures by substituting lower cost products or other therapies for our products. In connection with Guidant product recalls, certain third party payors have sought, and others may seek, recourse against us for amounts previously reimbursed. We are subject to extensive and dynamic medical device regulation, which may impede or hinder the approval or sale of our products and, in some cases, may ultimately result in an inability to obtain approval of certain products or may result in the recall or seizure of previously approved products. 28 Table of Contents Our products, marketing, sales and development activities and manufacturing processes are subject to extensive and rigorous regulation by the FDA pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDC Act), by comparable agencies in foreign countries, and by other regulatory agencies and governing bodies. Under the FDC Act, medical devices must receive FDA clearance or approval before they can be commercially marketed in the U.S. The FDA has recently been reviewing its clearance process in an effort to make it more rigorous, and there have been a number of recommendations made by various task forces and working groups to change the 510(k) Submission program. Some of these proposals, if enacted, could increase the level and complexity of premarket data requirements for certain higher risk Class II products. Others could increase the cost of maintaining the legal status of Class II devices entered into the market via 510(k) Submissions. We have a portfolio of products that includes numerous Class II medical devices. If implemented as currently proposed, the changes to the 510(k) Submission program could substantially increase the cost, complexity and time to market for certain higher risk Class II medical devices. In addition, most major markets for medical devices outside the U.S. require clearance, approval or compliance with certain standards before a product can be commercially marketed. The process of obtaining marketing approval or clearance from the FDA for new products, or with respect to enhancements or modifications to existing products, could take a significant period of time; require the expenditure of substantial resources; involve rigorous pre clinical and clinical testing, as well as increased post market surveillance; require changes to products; and result in limitations on the indicated uses of products. Countries around the world have adopted more stringent regulatory requirements than in the past and that have added or are expected to add to the delays and uncertainties associated with new product releases, as well as the clinical and regulatory costs of supporting those releases. Even after products have received marketing approval or clearance, product approvals and clearances by the FDA can be withdrawn due to failure to comply with regulatory standards or the occurrence of unforeseen problems following initial approval. There can be no assurance that we will receive the required clearances for new products or modifications to existing products on a timely basis or that any approval will not be subsequently withdrawn or conditi1d upon extensive post market study requirements. In addition, regulations regarding the development, manufacture and sale of medical devices are subject to future change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, those changes might have on our business. Failure to comply with regulatory requirements could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Later discovery of previously unknown problems with a product or manufacturer could result in fines, delays or suspensions of regulatory clearances, seizures or recalls of products, physician advisories or other field actions, operating restrictions and or criminal prosecution. We may also initiate field actions as a result of a failure to strictly comply with our internal quality policies. The failure to receive product approval clearance on a timely basis, suspensions of regulatory clearances, seizures or recalls of products, physician advisories or other field actions, or the withdrawal of product approval by the FDA could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Our products, including those of our cardiovascular businesses, are continually subject to clinical trials conducted by us, our competitors or other third parties, the results of which may be unfavorable, or perceived as unfavorable by the market, and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. As a part of the regulatory process of obtaining marketing clearance for new products, we conduct and participate in numerous clinical trials with a variety of study designs, patient populations and trial endpoints. Unfavorable or inconsistent clinical data from existing or future clinical trials conducted by us, by our competitors or by third parties, or the market perception of this clinical data, may adversely impact our ability 29 Table of Contents to obtain product approvals, our position in, and share of, the markets in which we participate and our business, financial condition, results of operations or future prospects. Our future growth is dependent upon the development of new products, which requires significant research and development, clinical trials and regulatory approvals, all of which are very expensive and time consuming and may not result in commercially viable products. In order to develop new products and improve current product offerings, we focus our research and development programs largely on the development of next generation and novel technology offerings across multiple programs and businesses. We expect to launch our internally manufactured next generation everolimus eluting stent system, the PROMUS Element platinum chromium coronary stent, in the U.S. and Japan in mid 2012, subject to regulatory approval. In addition, we expect to continue to invest in our CRM technologies, including our LATITUDE Patient Management System and our next generation products and technologies. If we are unable to develop and launch these and other products as anticipated, our ability to maintain or expand our market position in the drug eluting stent and CRM markets may be materially adversely impacted. Further, we are continuing to investigate, and have completed several acquisitions involving, opportunities to further expand our presence in, and diversify into, areas including, but not limited to, atrial fibrillation, underserved defibrillator populations, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, structural heart disease, hypertension, women health, endoluminal surgery, diabetes obesity, endoscopic pulmonary intervention and deep brain stimulation. Expanding our focus beyond our current businesses is expensive and time consuming. Further, there can be no assurance that we will be able to access these technologies on terms favorable to us, or that these technologies will achieve commercial feasibility, obtain regulatory approval or gain market acceptance. A delay in the development or approval of these technologies or our decision to reduce our investments may adversely impact the contribution of these technologies to our future growth. The medical device industry is experiencing greater scrutiny and regulation by governmental authorities and is the subject of numerous investigations, often involving marketing and other business practices. These investigations could result in the commencement of civil and criminal proceedings; substantial fines, penalties and administrative remedies; divert the attention of our management; impose administrative costs and have an adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity; and may lead to greater governmental regulation in the future. The medical devices we design, develop, manufacture and market are subject to rigorous regulation by the FDA and numerous other federal, state and foreign governmental authorities. These authorities have been increasing their scrutiny of our industry. We have received subpoenas and other requests for information from Congress and other state and federal governmental agencies, including, among others, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Department of Defense. These investigations relate primarily to financial arrangements with healthcare providers, regulatory compliance and product promotional practices. We are cooperating with these investigations and are responding to these requests. We cannot predict when the investigations will be resolved, the outcome of these investigations or their impact on us. An adverse outcome in 1 or more of these investigations could include the commencement of civil and criminal proceedings; substantial fines, penalties and administrative remedies, including exclusion from government reimbursement programs, entry into Corporate Integrity Agreements (CIAs) with governmental agencies and amendments to existing CIAs. In addition, resolution of any of these matters could involve the imposition of additional and costly compliance obligations. For example, in 2009, we entered into a civil settlement with the DOJ regarding the DOJ investigation relating to certain post market surveys conducted by Guidant Corporation before we acquired Guidant in 2006. As part of the settlement, we entered into a CIA with the Office of Inspector General for HHS. The CIA requires enhancements to certain compliance procedures related to financial arrangements with healthcare providers. The obligations imposed upon us by the CIA and cooperation with ongoing investigations will involve employee resources costs and diversion of employee focus. Cooperation typically also involves document production costs. We may incur greater future costs to fulfill the obligations imposed upon us by the CIA. Further, the CIA, and if any of the ongoing investigations continue over a long period of time, could further divert the attention of management from the day to day operations of our business and impose significant additional administrative burdens on us. These potential consequences, as well as any adverse outcome from these investigations, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. 30 Table of Contents In addition, certain state governments (including that of Massachusetts, where we are headquartered) have enacted, and the federal government has proposed, legislation aimed at increasing transparency of our interactions with healthcare professionals (HCPs). As a result, we are required by law to disclose payments and other transfers for value to HCPs licensed by certain states and expect similar requirements at the federal level in the future. Any failure to comply with the enhanced legal and regulatory requirements could impact our business. In addition, we devoted substantial additional time and financial resources to further develop and implement enhanced structure, policies, systems and processes to comply with enhanced legal and regulatory requirements, which may also impact our business. Further, recent Supreme Court case law has clarified that the FDA authority over medical devices preempts state tort laws, but legislation has been introduced at the Federal level to allow state intervention, which could lead to increased and inconsistent regulation at the state level. We anticipate that the government will continue to scrutinize our industry closely and that we will be subject to more rigorous regulation by governmental authorities in the future. Changes in tax laws, unfavorable resolution of tax contingencies, or exposure to additional income tax liabilities could have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. We are subject to income taxes as well as non income based taxes, in both the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. We are subject to ongoing tax audits in various jurisdictions. Tax authorities may disagree with certain positions we have taken and assess additional taxes. We regularly assess the likely outcomes of these audits in order to determine the appropriateness of our tax provision and have established contingency reserves for material, known tax exposures, including potential tax audit adjustments related to transfer pricing in connection with the technology license agreements between domestic and foreign subsidiaries of Guidant Corporation, in relation to which we recently received Notices of Deficiency from the Internal Revenue Service for the 2001 2003 tax years. However, there can be no assurance that we will accurately predict the outcomes of these audits or issues raised by tax authorities will be resolved at a financial cost that does not exceed our related reserves, and the actual outcomes of these audits could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition. Additionally, changes in tax laws or tax rulings could materially impact our effective tax rate. For example, proposals for fundamental U.S. corporate tax reform, if enacted, could have a significant adverse impact on our future results of operations. In addition, the recently enacted Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Affordability Reconciliation Act of 2010 impose on medical device manufacturers a 23 percent excise tax on U.S. sales of Class I, II and III medical devices beginning in 2013 U.S. net sales represented 56 percent of our worldwide net sales in 2010 and, therefore, this tax burden may have a material, negative impact on our results of operations and our cash flows. We may not effectively be able to protect our intellectual property rights, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. The medical device market in which we primarily participate is largely technology driven. Physician customers, particularly in interventional cardiology, have historically moved quickly to new products and new technologies. As a result, intellectual property rights, particularly patents and trade secrets, play a significant role in product development and differentiation. However, intellectual property litigation is inherently complex and unpredictable. Furthermore, appellate courts can overturn lower court patent decisions. In addition, competing parties frequently file multiple suits to leverage patent portfolios across product lines, technologies and geographies and to balance risk and exposure between the parties. In some cases, several competitors are parties in the same proceeding, or in a series of related proceedings, or litigate multiple features of a single class of devices. These forces frequently drive settlement not only of individual cases, but also of a series of pending and potentially related and unrelated cases. In addition, although m1tary and injunctive relief is typically sought, remedies and restitution are generally not determined until the conclusion of the trial court proceedings and can be modified on appeal. Accordingly, the outcomes of individual cases are difficult to time, predict or quantify and are often dependent upon the outcomes of other cases in other geographies. 31 Table of Contents Several third parties have asserted that our current and former product offerings infringe patents owned or licensed by them. We have similarly asserted that products sold by our competitors infringe patents owned or licensed by us. Adverse outcomes in 1 or more of the proceedings against us could limit our ability to sell certain products in certain jurisdictions, or reduce our operating margin on the sale of these products and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. Patents and other proprietary rights are and will continue to be essential to our business, and our ability to compete effectively with other companies will be dependent upon the proprietary nature of our technologies. We rely upon trade secrets, know how, continuing technological innovations, strategic alliances and licensing opportunities to develop, maintain and strengthen our competitive position. We pursue a policy of generally obtaining patent protection in both the U.S. and abroad for patentable subject matter in our proprietary devices and attempt to review third party patents and patent applications to the extent publicly available in order to develop an effective patent strategy, avoid infringement of third party patents, identify licensing opportunities and monitor the patent claims of others. We currently own numerous U.S. and foreign patents and have numerous patent applications pending. We also are party to various license agreements pursuant to which patent rights have been obtained or granted in consideration for cash, cross licensing rights or royalty payments. No assurance can be made that any pending or future patent applications will result in the issuance of patents, that any current or future patents issued to, or licensed by, us will not be challenged or circumvented by our competitors, or that our patents will not be found invalid. In addition, we may have to take legal action in the future to protect our patents, trade secrets or know how or to assert them against claimed infringement by others. Any legal action of that type could be costly and time consuming and no assurances can be made that any lawsuit will be successful. We are generally involved as both a plaintiff and a defendant in a number of patent infringement and other intellectual property related actions. The invalidation of key patents or proprietary rights that we own, or an unsuccessful outcome in lawsuits to protect our intellectual property, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Pending and future intellectual property litigation could be costly and disruptive to us. We operate in an industry that is susceptible to significant intellectual property litigation and, in recent years, it has been common for companies in the medical device field to aggressively challenge the patent rights of other companies in order to prevent the marketing of new devices. We are currently the subject of various patent litigation proceedings and other proceedings described in more detail under Item 3 Legal Proceedings and Note L Commitments and Contingencies to our 2010 consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report . Intellectual property litigation is expensive, complex and lengthy and its outcome is difficult to predict. Adverse outcomes in 1 or more of these matters could have a material adverse effect on our ability to sell certain products and on our operating margins, financial condition, results of operation or liquidity. Pending or future patent litigation may result in significant royalty or other payments or injunctions that can prevent the sale of products and may significantly divert the attention of our technical and management personnel. In the event that our right to market any of our products is successfully challenged, we may be required to obtain a license on terms which may not be favorable to us, if at all. If we fail to obtain a required license or are unable to design around a patent, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially adversely affected. Pending and future product liability claims and other litigation, including private securities litigation, shareholder derivative suits and contract litigation, may adversely affect our business, reputation and ability to attract and retain customers. The design, manufacture and marketing of medical devices of the types that we produce entail an inherent risk of product liability claims. Many of the medical devices that we manufacture and sell are designed to be implanted in the human body for long periods of time or indefinitely. A number of factors could result in an unsafe condition or injury to, or death of, a patient with respect to these or other products that we manufacture or sell, including comp1nt failures, manufacturing flaws, design defects or inadequate disclosure of product related risks or product related information. These factors could result in product liability claims, a recall of 1 or more 32 Table of Contents of our products or a safety alert relating to 1 or more of our products. Product liability claims may be brought by individuals or by groups seeking to represent a class. The outcome of litigation, particularly class action lawsuits, is difficult to assess or quantify. Plaintiffs in these types of lawsuits often seek recovery of very large or indeterminate amounts, including not only actual damages, but also punitive damages. The magnitude of the potential losses relating to these lawsuits may remain unknown for substantial periods of time. In addition, the cost to defend against any future litigation may be significant. Further, we are substantially self insured with respect to product liability and intellectual property infringement claims. We maintain insurance policies providing limited coverage against securities claims. The absence of significant third party insurance coverage increases our potential exposure to unanticipated claims and adverse decisions. Product liability claims, securities and commercial litigation and other litigation in the future, regardless of the outcome, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. Any failure to meet regulatory quality standards applicable to our manufacturing and quality processes could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. As a medical device manufacturer, we are required to register with the FDA and are subject to periodic inspection by the FDA for compliance with its Quality System Regulation requirements, which require manufacturers of medical devices to adhere to certain regulations, including testing, quality control and documentation procedures. In addition, the Federal Medical Device Reporting regulations require us to provide information to the FDA whenever there is evidence that reasonably suggests that a device may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury or, if a malfunction were to occur, could cause or contribute to a death or serious injury. Compliance with applicable regulatory requirements is subject to continual review and is monitored rigorously through periodic inspections by the FDA which may result in observations on Form 483, and in some cases warning letters, that require corrective action. In the European Community, we are required to maintain certain International Standards Organization (ISO) certifications in order to sell our products and must undergo periodic inspections by notified bodies to obtain and maintain these certifications. If we, or our manufacturers, fail to adhere to quality system regulations or ISO requirements, this could delay production of our products and lead to fines, difficulties in obtaining regulatory clearances, recalls, enforcement actions, including injunctive relief or consent decrees, or other consequences, which could, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Interruption of our manufacturing operations could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Our products are designed and manufactured in technology centers around the world, either by us or third parties. In most cases, the manufacturing of our products is concentrated in 1 or a few locations. Factors such as a failure to follow specific internal protocols and procedures, equipment malfunction, environmental factors or damage to 1 or more of our facilities could adversely affect our ability to manufacture our products. In the event of an interruption in manufacturing, we may be unable to quickly move to alternate means of producing affected products or to meet customer demand. In some instances, for example, if the interruption is a result of a failure to follow regulatory protocols and procedures, we may experience delays in resuming production of affected products due primarily to needs for regulatory approvals. As a result, we may suffer loss of market share, which we may be unable to recapture, and harm to our reputation, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. We rely on external manufacturers to supply us with certain materials, comp1nts and products. Any disruption in our sources of supply or the price of inventory supplied to us could adversely impact our production efforts and could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. We purchase many of the materials and comp1nts used in manufacturing our products, some of which are custom made from third party vendors. Certain supplies are purchased from single sources due to quality considerations, expertise, costs or constraints resulting from regulatory requirements. In the event of a disruption 33 Table of Contents in supply, we may not be able to establish additional or replacement suppliers for certain comp1nts, materials or products in a timely manner largely due to the complex nature of our and many of our suppliers manufacturing processes. In addition, our products require sterilization prior to sale and we rely on a mix of internal resources and third party vendors to perform this service. Production issues, including capacity constraint; the inability to sterilize our products; quality issues affecting us or our suppliers; an inability to develop and validate alternative sources if required; or a significant increase in the price of materials or comp1nts could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Our share price will fluctuate, and accordingly, the value of an investment in our common stock may also fluctuate. Stock markets in general, and our common stock in particular, have experienced significant price and volume volatility over recent years. The market price and trading volume of our common stock may continue to be subject to significant fluctuations due not only to general stock market conditions, but also to variability in the prevailing sentiment regarding our operations or business prospects, as well as, among other things, changing investment priorities of our shareholders. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
