CIK: 898437
Company Name: ANIKA THERAPEUTICS INC 
Form Type : 10-K
Filing Date: 2015-03-13
Accession Number: 0001171843-15-001395


ITEM 1 BUSINESS Overview We develop, manufacture, and commercialize therapeutic products for tissue protection, healing, and repair. These products are based on hyaluronic acid ( HA ), a naturally occurring, biocompatible polymer found throughout the body. Due to its unique biophysical and biochemical properties, HA plays an important role in a number of physiological functions such as the protection and lubrication of soft tissues and joints, the maintenance of the structural integrity of tissues, and the transport of molecules to and within cells. Our wholly owned subsidiary, Anika S.r.l., has over 20 products currently commercialized, primarily in Europe. These products are also all made from HA, based on 2 technologies HYAFF, which is a solid form of HA, and ACP gel, an autocross linked polymer of HA. Both technologies are protected by an extensive portfolio of owned and licensed patents. Our proprietary technologies for modifying the HA molecule allow product properties to be tailored specifically to therapeutic use. Our patented technology chemically modifies the HA to allow for longer residence time in the body. We offer therapeutic products from these aforementi1d technologies in the following areas Anika Anika S.r.l. Orthobiologics X X Dermal Advanced wound care Aesthetic dermatology X X Surgical Anti adhesion Ear, nose and throat care ( ENT ) X X X Ophthalmic X Veterinary X In December 2012, we announced a strategic shift which involved the closure of our tissue engineering facility in Abano Terme, Italy due to the inability to meet strict regulatory standards established by the European Medicines Agency ( EMA ) for Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products ( ATMP ) (cell based) products that became effective January 1, 2013 In 2013, we completed a restructuring plan which included a reduction in force of 12 people and provided for severance payments, disposals of related supplies, equipment, and other assets. This plan was intended to improve the efficiency and financial performance of our Italian operations by reducing costs and focusing on products and technology with strong commercial potential. In connection with the plan, we recorded a fourth quarter 2012 pre tax charge of approximately $25 million, including $13 million for severance, various expenses, and write offs of supplies and equipment, and a $12 million non cash charge related to the abandonment of the HYALOGRAFT C autograft in process research and development ( IPR&D ) project. The following sections provide more specific information about our products and related activities Orthobiologics Our orthobiologics products consist of joint health and orthopedic products. These products are used in a wide range of treatments, from providing pain relief from osteoarthritis, to regenerating damaged tissue such as cartilage. Osteoarthritis is a debilitating disease causing pain, swelling, and restricted movement in joints. It occurs when the cartilage in a joint gradually deteriorates due to the effects of mechanical stress, which can be caused by a variety of factors, including the normal aging process. In an osteoarthritic joint, particular regions of articulating surfaces are exposed to irregular forces, which result in the remodeling of tissue surfaces that disrupt the normal equilibrium or mechanical function. As osteoarthritis advances, the joint gradually loses its ability to regenerate cartilage tissue, and the cartilage layer attached to the b1 deteriorates to the point where eventually the b1 becomes exposed. Advanced osteoarthritis often requires surgery and the possible implantation of artificial joints. The current treatment options for osteoarthritis, before joint replacement surgery, include viscosupplementation, analgesics, non steroidal anti inflammatory drugs, and steroid injections. 5 Our joint health products include ORTHOVISC, ORTHOVISC mini , and MONOVISC. ORTHOVISC is available in the United States, Canada, and other international markets for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee, and in Europe and certain international markets for the treatment of osteoarthritis in all joints. In the U.S. market, ORTHOVISC is the lead product in the multi injection segment, and the number 2 viscosupplementation product overall. ORTHOVISC mini is available in Europe, and it is designed for the treatment of osteoarthritis in small joints. MONOVISC is our single injection osteoarthritis treatment indicated for all joints in Europe and certain international markets, and for the knee in the United States, Turkey, and Canada. ORTHOVISC has been marketed by us internationally since 1996. ORTHOVISC mini and MONOVISC are our joint health viscosupplementation products which became available in certain international markets in the second quarter of 2008. Our most recent U.S. product approval was received from the FDA in February 2014 for MONOVISC, and the related commercial introduction in the United States occurred in April 2014. In the United States, ORTHOVISC is indicated for the treatment of pain caused by osteoarthritis of the knee in patients who have failed to respond adequately to conservative, non pharmacologic therapy and to simple analgesics, such as acetaminophen. ORTHOVISC is a sterile, clear, viscous solution of hyaluronan dissolved in physiological saline and dispensed in a single use syringe. A complex sugar of the glycosaminoglycan family, hyaluronan is a high molecular weight polysaccharide composed of repeating disaccharide units of sodium glucuronate and N acetyl glucosamine. ORTHOVISC is injected into joints in a series of 3 intra articular injections 1 week apart. ORTHOVISC became available for sale in the United States on March 1, 2004, and it is marketed by DePuy Synthes Mitek Sports Medicine ( Mitek ) under the terms of a ten year licensing, distribution, supply, and marketing agreement which was entered into in December 2003 and was extended for an additional 5 years in November 2012 (the Mitek ORTHOVISC Agreement ). Outside of the U.S., we have a number of distribution relationships servicing international markets including Canada, Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, and Asia. We will continue to seek to establish distribution relationships in other key markets. See the sections capti1d Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Overview and Risk Factors. In the United States, MONOVISC is also indicated for the treatment of pain caused by osteoarthritis of the knee in patients who have failed to respond adequately to conservative, non pharmacologic therapy and to simple analgesics, such as acetaminophen. MONOVISC is a sterile, clear, viscous solution of partially cross linked sodium hyaluronate in a phosphate buffered saline solution. A treatment of MONOVISC is comprised of 1 injection of the product delivered directly into the affected joint. MONOVISC became available for sale in the United States in April 2014, and it is also marketed by Mitek under the terms of a fifteen year licensing, distribution, supply, and marketing agreement, which was entered into on December 21, 2011 (the Mitek MONOVISC Agreement ). Outside of the United States, we have a number of distribution relationships servicing international markets including Canada, Europe, Latin America, Asia, and certain other international countries. We continue to seek to establish distribution relationships in other key markets. See the sections capti1d Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Overview and Risk Factors. In addition to the 3 viscosupplementation products discussed above, we also offer several additional products used in connection with orthopedic regenerative medicine. These products are based on the HYAFF technology and are currently available in Europe, South America, and Asia. They include HYALOFAST, a biodegradable support for human b1 marrow mesenchymal stem cells used for cartilage regeneration and as an adjunct for microfracture surgery; HYAL1CT, a woven gauze used as a graft wrap; and HYALOSS MATRIX, HYAFF fibers used to mix blood b1 grafts to form a paste for b1 regeneration. We also offer HYALOGLIDE, an ACP gel used in tenolysis treatment, with the potential for use in flexor tendon adhesion prevention and for use in the shoulder for prevention of adhesive capsulitis with additional clinical data. These products are commercialized through a ne2rk of distributors, primarily in Europe, the Middle East, and Korea. Dermal Our dermal products consist of advanced wound care products, based on the HYAFF technology, and aesthetic dermal fillers, based on our proprietary chemically modified cross linked HA technology, BCDI. Products utilizing our HYAFF technology are used for the treatment of skin wounds, ranging from burns to diabetic ulcers. The products cover a variety of wound treatment solutions including debridement agents, advanced therapies to aid healing, and scaffolds used as skin substitutes. Leading products include HYALOMATRIX and HYALOFILL, for the treatment of complex wounds such as burns and ulcers. The dermal products are commercialized through a ne2rk of distributors, primarily in Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. Several of the products are also cleared for sale in the United States including HYALOMATRIX, HYALOFILL, HYALOGRAN, and HYALOMATRIX 3D. In 2012, we entered into a distribution agreement for sales of advanced wound care products in nine South American countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Chile. In July 2014, we entered into an agreement with Medline Industries, Inc. to commercialize HYALOMATRIX in the United States on an exclusive basis through 2019. 6 Our aesthetic dermatology product is a dermal filler based on our proprietary chemically modified, cross linked HA, and it is commercialized in Europe, Canada, the United States, and Korea. Internationally, this product is marketed under the ELEVESS name. In the United States, the trade name is HYDRELLE, although the product is not currently marketed in the United States, Surgical Our surgical business consists of products used to prevent surgical adhesions and to treat ENT disorders. HYALOBARRIER is a clinically proven post operative adhesion barrier for use in the abdomino pelvic area. The product is currently commercialized by Anika S.r.l. in Europe, the Middle East, and certain Asian countries through a distribution ne2rk, but it is not approved for sale in the United States. HYALOSPINE, a product designed to prevent post surgical adhesions following spinal surgery, was CE Mark approved in January 2015 for sale in Europe. INCERT, approved for sale in Europe, Turkey, and Malaysia, is a chemically modified, cross linked HA product, for the prevention of spinal post surgical adhesions. There are currently no plans at this time to distribute INCERT in the United States. We co own issued U.S. patents covering the use of INCERT for adhesion prevention. See the section capti1d Patent and Proprietary Rights. Surgical adhesions occur when fibrous bands of tissues form between adjacent tissue layers during the wound healing process. Although surgeons attempt to minimize the formation of adhesions, they nevertheless occur quite frequently after surgery. Adhesions in the abdominal and pelvic cavity can cause particularly serious problems such as intestinal blockage following abdominal surgery and infertility following pelvic surgery. Fibrosis following spinal surgery can complicate re operation and may cause pain. Anika S.r.l. offers several products used in connection with the treatment of ENT disorders. The lead products are MEROGEL, a woven fleece nasal packing, and MEROGEL INJECTABLE, a thick, viscous hydrogel composed of cross linked hyaluronic acid a biocompatible agent that creates a moist wound healing environment. Anika S.r.l. has partnered with Medtronic for worldwide distribution of these ENT products. Ophthalmic Our ophthalmic business includes HA viscoelastic products used in ophthalmic surgery. The ophthalmic products we manufacture include STAARVISC II, OPTIVISC (formerly ShellGel), ANIKAVISC, and NUVISC. They are injectable, high molecular weight HA products used as viscoelastic agents in ophthalmic surgical procedures such as cataract extraction and intraocular lens implantation. These products coat, lubricate, and protect sensitive tissue such as the endothelium, and they function to maintain the shape of the eye, thereby facilitating ophthalmic surgical procedures. We previously manufactured the AMVISC product line for Bausch & Lomb ( B&L ) under the terms of an exclusive supply agreement that expired on December 31, 2010 (the 2004 B&L Agreement ) for viscoelastic products used in ophthalmic surgery. Effective January 1, 2011, we entered into a non exclusive, 2 year contract with B&L intended to transition the manufacture of AMVISC and AMVISC Plus to an alternative, low cost supplier formerly affiliated with B&L, and continued to supply B&L with these products during 2011 Effective January 1, 2012, the parties agreed to a 3 year contract for us to continue to supply these products to B&L as a second supplier with committed annual volumes through year end 2014, and the contract was not renewed upon expiration. Veterinary HYVISC is a high molecular weight injectable HA product for the treatment of joint dysfunction in horses due to non infectious synovitis associated with equine osteoarthritis. HYVISC has viscoelastic properties that lubricate and protect the tissues in horse joints. HYVISC is distributed by Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Inc. in the United States and in selected countries in the Middle East. See Note 15 Revenue by Product Group, by Significant Customer and by Geographic Region; Geographic Information to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10 K for a discussion regarding our segments and geographic sales. 7 See also the section capti1d Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Business and Industry We experience quarterly sales volume variation, which makes our future results difficult to predict and makes period to period comparisons potentially not meaningful for a discussion regarding the effect that quarterly sales volume variation could have on our business and financial performance. See also the section capti1d Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Business and Industry A significant portion of our revenues are derived from a small number of customers, the loss of which could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations for a discussion regarding our dependence on large volume customers and the effects that the loss of any such customer could have on our business and financial performance. Research and Development of Potential Products Our research and development efforts primarily consist of the development of new medical applications for our HA based technology, the management of clinical trials for certain product candidates, the preparation and processing of applications for regulatory approvals or clearances at all relevant stages of product development, and process development and scale up manufacturing activities for our existing and new products. Our development focus includes products for tissue protection, repair, and regeneration. For the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, these expenses were $8.1 million, $7.1 million, and $5.4 million, respectively. We anticipate that our research and development efforts, including pre clinical studies and clinical trials, will increase significantly in the near future over historical levels. Our second single injection osteoarthritis product, which is currently under development, is CINGAL, a product based on our hyaluronic acid material with an added active therapeutic molecule designed to provide broad pain relief for a longer period of time. During the second quarter of 2013, we commenced a multinational phase III clinical trial to obtain the clinical data necessary for a CE Mark submission and approval, and to support other product registrations including in the United States. We completed the clinical study and the associated statistical analysis in the fourth quarter of 2014. We submitted our CE Mark application in December 2014 and a pre market approval application ( PMA ) with the FDA in February 2015. The technologies obtained through our acquisition of Anika S.r.l. have enhanced our research and development capabilities and our pipeline of product candidates. Anika S.r.l. has research and development programs for new products including HYALOFAST , an innovative hyaluronic acid matrix for human b1 marrow mesenchymal stem cells used to regenerate soft tissue. HYALOFAST received CE Mark approval in September 2009, and it is currently commercially available in Europe and certain international countries. During the second quarter of 2014, we submitted a proposed investigational device protocol to the FDA. Our current plan is to begin a phase III clinical trial in 2015. HYALOSPINE is an adhesion prevention gel for use after spinal surgery. We completed a pilot clinical study in 2012, submitted the CE Mark application in September 2013, and received the CE Mark approval in January 2015. Our research and development efforts may not be successful in (1) developing our existing product candidates, (2) expanding the therapeutic applications of our existing products, or (3) resulting in new applications for our HA technology. There is also a risk that we may choose not to pursue development of potential product candidates. We may not be able to obtain regulatory approval for any new applications we develop. Furthermore, even if all regulatory approvals are obtained, there can be no assurances that we will achieve meaningful sales of such products or applications. Patent and Proprietary Rights Our products and trademarks, including our Company name, product names, and logos, are proprietary. We rely on a combination of patent protection, trade secrets and trademark laws, license agreements, and confidentiality and other contractual provisions to protect our proprietary information. We have a policy of seeking patent protection for patentable aspects of our proprietary technology. In the United States, we own 28 patents, co own 2 patents, license 25 patents, and have 2 patent applications currently pending. These U.S. patents have expiration dates through 2030. Internationally, we own 218 patents, co own 9 patents, license 133 patents, and have 11 patent applications currently pending. Outside of the United States, we own, co own, license, or have filed for patents in 38 jurisdictions. Our international patents have expiration dates through 2032 Many of these patents, including all licensed patents, belong to the Anika S.r.l. patent estate, which is extensive and partly intertwined with its former parent company, Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., through a patent licensing agreement that provides Anika S.r.l. with access to certain of Fidia patents to the extent required to support Anika S.r.l. products. We intend to seek patent protection for products and processes developed in the course of our activities when we believe such protection is in our best interests and when the cost of seeking such protection is not inordinate relative to the potential benefits. 8 In 2014, we were granted 5 new patents in the United States and Canada. The patents covered regenerative technologies and products and our HYALOSPINE product, among others. Other entities have filed patent applications for, or have been issued patents concerning, various aspects of HA related products or processes. In addition, the products or processes we develop may infringe the patent rights of others in the future. Any such infringement may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We rely upon trade secrets and proprietary know how for certain non patented aspects of our technology. To protect such information, we require certain customers and vendors, and all employees, consultants and licensees to enter into confidentiality agreements limiting the disclosure and use of such information. These agreements, however, may not provide adequate protection. See also the section capti1d Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property . We have granted Mitek an exclusive and non transferable royalty bearing license to develop, commercialize, and sell ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC, in the United States pursuant to the Mitek ORTHOVISC Agreement and the Mitek MONOVISC Agreement. These agreements include a license to manufacture, and have manufactured, such products in the event that we are unable to supply Mitek with ORTHOVISC or MONOVISC in accordance with the terms of the relevant agreement. We have also granted Mitek the exclusive, royalty free right to use the trademarks ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC in connection with the marketing, distribution, and sale of the licensed products within the United States. Government Regulation U.S. Regulation Our research (including clinical research), development, manufacture, and marketing of products are subject to regulation by numerous governmental authorities in the United States and other countries. Medical devices and pharmaceuticals are subject to extensive and rigorous regulation by the FDA, and by other federal, state, and local authorities. The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act ( FDC Act ) and connected regulations govern the conditions of safety, efficacy, clearance, approval, manufacture, quality system requirements, labeling, packaging, distribution, storage, record keeping, reporting, marketing, advertising, and promotion of our products. Noncompliance with applicable requirements can result in, among other things, fines, injunctions, civil penalties, recall or seizure of products, total or partial suspension of production, refusal of the government to grant premarket clearance or approval of products, withdrawal of clearances and approvals, and criminal prosecution. Medical products regulated by the FDA are generally classified as drugs, biologics, and or medical devices. Medical devices intended for human use are classified into 3 categories (Class I, II or III) on the basis of the controls deemed reasonably necessary by the FDA to assure their safety and efficacy. Class I devices are subject to general controls, which include, for example, labeling and adherence to the FDA Good Manufacturing Practices Quality System Regulation ( GMP QSR ). Many Class I devices are exempt from the FDA 510(k) review process. Class II devices are subject to general and special controls, which include, among other requirements, performance standards, post market surveillance, and patient registries. Most Class II devices are subject to premarket notification and may be subject to clinical testing for purposes of premarket notification and clearance for marketing. Class III is the most stringent regulatory category for medical devices. Most Class III devices require a PMA from the FDA. OPTIVISC (formerly SHELLGEL), STAARVISC, ANIKAVISC, and NUVISC are approved as Class III medical devices in the United States for intraocular ophthalmic surgical procedures used in humans. ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC are approved as Class III medical devices in the United States for treatment of pain resulting from osteoarthritis of the knee in humans. HYDRELLE is approved as a Class III medical device in the United States for treatment of facial wrinkles and folds, such as nasolabial folds. HYVISC is approved as an animal drug for intra articular injection in horse joints to treat degenerative joint disease associated with synovitis. Most HA products for human use are regulated as medical devices. We believe that our INCERT product, should we decide to seek U.S. approval to market, will have to meet the regulatory requirements for Class III devices and will require clinical trials and a PMA submission. 9 Our subsidiary, Anika S.r.l., has four advanced wound care products cleared in the United States through premarket notification (510(k)) as unclassified devices HYALOMATRIX, HYALOFILL F R, LASERSKIN HYALOMATRIX KC, and HYALOSAFE JALOSKIN. Anika S.r.l. also has 2 510(k) Class I exempt advanced wound care products in the United States HYALOGRAN and HYALOMATRIX 3D. Anika S.r.l also has a 510(k) cleared Class II ENT product, HYALOMATRIX CO. All other Anika S.r.l. ENT products are 510(k) cleared as Class II devices, and were submitted for FDA approval by Medtronic. Not all of our 510(k) cleared products are currently being marketed in the United States. The FDA 510(k) clearance process is under review and changes to the process may have an impact on current or future product approvals. Unless a new device is exempted from premarket notification, its manufacturer must obtain marketing clearance from the FDA through 510(k) or approval through PMA before the device can be introduced to the market. Product development and approval within the FDA regulatory framework takes a number of years and involves the expenditure of substantial resources. This regulatory framework may change or additional regulations may arise at any stage of our product development process and may affect approval of, or delay in, an application related to a product, or require additional expenditures by us. There can be no assurance that the FDA will accept submissions related to our products, or that once accepted, review of our submissions will result in product approval on a timely basis, if at all. The PMA approval process is lengthy and expensive, and it typically requires, among other things, valid scientific evidence, which generally includes extensive data such as pre clinical and clinical trial data to demonstrate a reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness. Human clinical trials in the United States for significant risk devices must be conducted under Good Clinical Practice ( GCP ) regulations through an Investigational Device Exemption ( IDE ), which must be submitted to the FDA and either be approved or be allowed to become effective before the trials may commence. There can be no assurance that submission of an IDE will result in the ability to commence clinical trials or in the future approval of the product. In addition, the IDE approval process can result in significant delays. Even if the FDA approves an IDE or allows an IDE for a clinical investigation to become effective, clinical trials may be suspended at any time for a number of reasons. Among others, these reasons may include (a) failure to comply with applicable requirements, (b) inadequacy of informed consent, and (c) data generated suggesting that the risks to clinical subjects are not outweighed by the anticipated benefits to the clinical subjects or the importance of the knowledge to be gained, the investigation is scientifically unsound, or there is reason to believe that the device, as used, is ineffective. A trial may be terminated if serious unanticipated adverse events present an unreasonable risk to subjects. If clinical studies are suspended or terminated, we may be unable to continue the development of the investigational products affected. Upon completion of required clinical trials, for Class III medical devices, results might be presented to the FDA in a PMA application. In addition to the results of clinical investigations, the PMA applicant must submit other information relevant to the safety and efficacy of the device, including, among other things, the results of non clinical tests, a full description of the device and its comp1nts, a full description of the methods, facilities and controls used for manufacturing, and proposed labeling of the product. The FDA also conducts an on site inspection to determine whether an applicant conforms to the FDA current Quality System Regulation, formerly known as GMP. FDA review of the PMA may not result in timely, or any, PMA approval, and there may be significant conditions to any approval, including limitations on labeling and advertising claims and the imposition of post market testing, tracking, or surveillance requirements. Upon completion of required clinical trials for pharmaceuticals, results might be presented to the FDA in a New Drug Application ( NDA ) or New Animal Drug Application ( NADA ). In addition to the results of clinical investigations, the NDA or NADA applicant must submit other information relevant to the safety and efficacy of the product, including, among other things, the results of non clinical tests and clinical trials, a full description of the product formulation, a full description of the methods, facilities and controls used for manufacturing the product, and proposed labeling of the product. The FDA also conducts an on site inspection to determine whether an applicant conforms to the FDA current Good Manufacturing Practices ( cGMP ) related to pharmaceuticals. FDA review of the NDA or NADA may not result in timely, or any, FDA approval, and there may be significant conditions on approval, including limitations on labeling and advertising claims and the imposition of post market testing, tracking, or surveillance requirements. 10 Post approval product or manufacturing changes where such change affects the safety and efficacy of the medical products, or the use of a different facility for manufacturing the product, could necessitate additional review and approval by the FDA. Post approval changes in labeling, packaging, or promotional materials may also necessitate further review and approval by the FDA. Legally marketed products are subject to continuing requirements by the FDA relating to design control, manufacturing, quality control and quality assurance, maintenance of records and documentation, reporting of adverse events, labeling and promotion. The FDC Act requires medical product manufacturers to comply with QSR for medical devices and cGMP regulations for pharmaceuticals. The FDA enforces these requirements through periodic inspections of manufacturing facilities. To ensure full compliance with the requirements set forth in the GMP QSR regulations, manufacturers must continue to expend time, m1y and effort in the area of production and quality control to ensure full technical compliance. Other federal, state and local agencies may inspect manufacturing facilities as well. Another set of regulations, known as the Medical Device Reporting and Drug Adverse Events Reporting System regulations, obligates manufacturers to inform the FDA whenever information reasonably suggests that 1 of their medical products may have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury. Reporting obligations are also triggered when a medical device malfunctions, and such malfunction, if it were to recur, would be likely to cause or contribute to a death or serious injury. Reporting of these events is mandatory, and any report could adversely affect our ability to continue to market our products in the United States and in other countries. The process of obtaining approvals from the FDA and foreign regulatory authorities can be costly, time consuming, and subject to unanticipated delays. Approvals of our products, processes, or facilities may not be granted on a timely basis or at all, and we may not have available resources or be able to obtain the financing needed to develop certain of such products. Any failure or delay in obtaining such approvals could adversely affect our ability to market our products in the United States and in other countries. In addition to regulations enforced by the FDA, we are subject to regulation under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Environmental Protection Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and other existing and future federal, state, and local laws and regulations as well as those of foreign governments. Federal, state, and foreign regulations regarding the manufacture and sale of medical products are subject to change. We cannot predict what impact, if any, such changes might have on our business. Foreign Regulation In addition to regulations enforced by the FDA, we and our products are subject to certain foreign regulations. International regulatory bodies often establish regulations governing product standards, manufacturing standards and requirements, packing requirements, labeling requirements, import restrictions, tariff regulations, duties, and tax requirements. ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC are approved for sale and are marketed in Canada, Europe, Turkey, parts of the Middle East, and Asia. In the European Union ( EU ), ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC are sold under the CE Mark authorization, a certification required under EU medical device regulations. The CE Mark for ORTHOVISC, achieved in 1996, allows the product to be marketed without further approvals in most of the EU nations as well as other countries that recognize EU device regulations. ORTHOVISC mini , our treatment for osteoarthritis that targets small joints, is available in Europe under a CE Mark authorization received in 2008. MONOVISC achieved CE Mark approval in 2007. In August 2004, we received a CE Design Examination Certificate, which entitles us to affix a CE Mark to INCERT as a barrier to adhesion formation following surgery. In May 2005, we received a CE Design Examination Certificate, which entitles us to affix a CE Mark to OPTIVISC (formerly SHELLGEL) as an ophthalmic viscoelastic surgical device. We also received a CE Mark for ANIKAVISC Plus in October 2011 and CE Mark approval for ELEVESS during the second quarter of 2007. In addition, we have received approval for several of our products in Latin America, Korea, Turkey, the Middle East, including Israel, the United Arab Emirates, and Saudi Arabia, and several markets in Asia, including the Philippines and Malaysia. Almost all of Anika S.r.l. products are CE marked for European sale. In addition, Anika S.r.l. has received approval for its products in Taiwan, Egypt, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Mexico, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Venezuela, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and the United Arab Emirates. We may not be able to achieve and or maintain the compliance required for CE marking or other foreign regulatory approvals for any or all of our products. The requirements relating to the conduct of clinical trials, product licensing, marketing, pricing, advertising, promotion, and reimbursement also vary widely from country to country. 11 Competition We compete with many companies including, among others, large pharmaceutical firms and specialized medical products companies, across all of our product lines. Many of these companies have substantially greater financial resources, larger research and development staffs, more extensive marketing and manufacturing organizations, and more experience in the regulatory processes than we have. We also compete with academic institutions, government agencies, and other research organizations, which may be involved in the research and development and commercialization of products. Many of our competitors also compete against us in securing relationships with collaborators for their research and development and commercialization programs. We compete with other market participants primarily on the efficacy of our products, our products reputation for safety, our focus solely on HA based products, and the breadth of our HA based product portfolio. Other factors that impact competition in our industry are the timing and scope of regulatory approvals, the availability of raw material and finished product supply, marketing and sales capability, reimbursement coverage, product pricing, and patent protection. Some of the principal factors that may affect our ability to compete in the HA development and commercialization markets include The quality and breadth of our continued development of our technology portfolio; Our ability to complete successful clinical studies and obtain FDA marketing and foreign regulatory approvals prior to our competitors; The successful execution of our commercial strategies; Our ability to recruit and retain skilled employees; and The availability of capital resources to fund discovery, development, and commercialization activities or the ability to defray such costs through securing relationships with collaborators for our research and development and commercialization programs. We are aware of several companies that are developing and or marketing products utilizing HA for a variety of human applications. In some cases, competitors have already obtained product approvals, submitted applications for approval or have commenced human clinical studies, either in the United States or in certain foreign countries. All of our products face substantial competition. There exist major worldwide competing products, made from HA and other materials, for use in orthopedics, surgical adhesion prevention, advanced wound care, ENT, cosmetic dermatology, and ophthalmic surgery. There is a risk that we will be unable to compete effectively against our current or future competitors. Additionally, legislation and regulation aimed at curbing rising healthcare costs has resulted in a consolidation trend in the healthcare industry to create larger companies, including hospitals, with greater market power. In turn, this has led to greater and more intense competition in the provision of products and services to market participants. Important market makers, like group purchasing organizations, have increased their negotiating leverage, and if these market makers demand significant prices concessions or if we are excluded as a supplier by these market makers, our net sales could be adversely impacted. See also the sections capti1d Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Business and Industry Substantial competition could materially affect our financial performance and Risk Factors Risks Related to Our Business and Industry Our business may be adversely affected in consolidation in the healthcare industry leads to demand for price concessions or if we are excluded from being a supplier by a group purchasing organization or similar entity for additional discussion of the impact competition could have on our business and financial results. Employees As of December 31, 2014, we had 105 employees, 21 of whom were located outside the United States. We consider our relations with our employees to be good. N1 of our U.S. employees are represented by labor unions, but most of the employees based in Italy are represented by unions, adding complexity and additional risks to the wage and employment decision process. Environmental Laws We believe that we are in compliance with all foreign, federal, state, and local environmental regulations with respect to our manufacturing facilities and that the cost of ongoing compliance with such regulations does not have a material effect on our operations. 12 Product Liability The testing, marketing, and sale of human health care products entails an inherent risk of allegations of product liability, and we cannot assure that substantial product liability claims will not be asserted against us. Although we have not received any material product liability claims to date and have coverage under our insurance policy of $5,000,000 per occurrence and $5,000,000 in the aggregate, we cannot assure that if material claims arise in the future, our insurance will be adequate to cover all situations. Moreover, we cannot assure that such insurance, or additional insurance, if required, will be available in the future or, if available, will be available on commercially reasonable terms. Any product liability claim, if successful, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operation. Available Information Our Annual Reports on Form 10 K, including our consolidated financial statements, Quarterly Reports on Form 10 Q, Current Reports on Form 8 K and other information, including amendments and exhibits to such reports, filed or furnished pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are available free of charge in the SEC Filings section of our website located at http www.anikatherapeutics.com, as soon as reasonably practicable after the reports are filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ). The information on our website is not part of this Annual Report on Form 10 K. Reports filed with the SEC may be viewed at www.sec.gov or obtained at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street NE, Washington, D.C. 20549. Information regarding the operation of the Public Reference Room may be obtained by calling the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330. ITEM ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS Our operating results and financial condition have varied in the past and could vary significantly in the future depending on a number of factors. You should consider carefully the risks and uncertainties described below, in addition to the other information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10 K, before deciding whether to purchase our common stock. If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition, results of operations, and future prospects could be materially and adversely affected. In that event, the trading price of our common stock could decline, and you could lose part or all of your investment. Risks Related to Our Business and Industry Failure to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, FDA or other U.S. and foreign governmental approvals for our products may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Several of our current products, including CINGAL and HYALOFAST, and any future products we may develop, will require clinical trials to determine their safety and efficacy for United States and international marketing approval by regulatory bodies, including the FDA. Product development and approval within the FDA framework takes a number of years and involves the expenditure of substantial resources. There can be no assurance that the FDA will accept submissions related to our new products, and, even if submissions are accepted, there can be no guarantee that the FDA will grant approval for our new products, including CINGAL or other line extensions, on a timely basis, if at all. In addition to regulations enforced by the FDA, we are subject to other existing and future federal, state, local, and foreign regulations applicable to product approval, which may vary significantly across jurisdictions. Additional approval of existing products may be required when changes to such products may affect the safety and effectiveness, including for new indications for use, labeling changes, process or manufacturing changes, the use of a different facility to manufacture, process or package the device, and changes in performance or design specifications. Failure to obtain regulatory approvals of our products, including any changes to existing products, could have an adverse material impact on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Even if granted, FDA and international regulatory approvals may be subject to significant, unanticipated delays throughout the regulatory approval process. Internally, we make assumptions regarding product approval timelines, both in the United States and internationally, in our business planning, and any delay in approval could materially affect our competitive position in the relevant product market and our projections related to future business results. 13 We cannot be certain that product approvals, both in the United States and internationally, will not include significant limitations on the product indications, and other claims sought for use, under which the products may be marketed. The relevant approval or clearance may also include other significant conditions of approval such as post market testing, tracking, or surveillance requirements. Any of these factors could significantly impact our competitive position in relation to such products and could have a negative impact on the sales of such products. Once obtained, we cannot guarantee that FDA or international product approvals will not be withdrawn or that relevant agencies will not require other corrective action, and any withdrawal or corrective action could materially affect our business and financial results. Once obtained, marketing approval can be withdrawn by the FDA or comparable foreign regulatory agencies for a number of reasons, including the failure to comply with ongoing regulatory requirements or the occurrence of unforeseen problems following initial approval. Regulatory authorities could also limit or prevent the manufacture or distribution of our products. Any regulatory limitations on the use of our products or any withdrawal or suspension of approval or rescission of approval by the FDA or a comparable foreign regulatory agency could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Our operations and products are subject to extensive regulation, compliance with which is costly and time consuming, and our failure to comply may result in substantial penalties, including recalls of our products. The FDA and foreign regulatory bodies impose extensive regulations applicable to our operations and products, including regulations governing product standards, packing requirements, labeling requirements, quality system and manufacturing requirements, import restrictions, tariff regulations, duties, and tax requirements. We cannot assure you that we will be able to achieve and maintain compliance required for FDA, CE marking, or other foreign regulatory approvals for any or all of our operations and products or that we will be able to produce our products in a timely and profitable manner while complying with applicable requirements. Failure to comply with applicable regulatory requirements could result in substantial penalties, including warning letters, fines, injunctions, civil penalties, seizure of products, total or partial suspension of production, refusal to grant pre market clearance or pre market approval for devices or drugs, withdrawal of approvals, and criminal prosecution. Additionally, regulatory authorities have the power to require the recall of our products. It also might be necessary for us, in applicable circumstances, to initiate a voluntary recall per regulatory requirements of 1 or several of our products. The imposition of any of the foregoing penalties, whether voluntarily or involuntary, could have a material negative impact on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Any changes in FDA or international regulations related to product approval, including those that apply retroactively, could adversely affect our competitive position and materially affect our business and financial results. FDA and foreign regulations depend heavily on administrative interpretation, and we cannot assure you that future interpretations made by the FDA or other regulatory bodies, with possible retroactive effect, will not adversely affect us. Additionally, any changes, whether in interpretation or substance, in existing regulations or policies, or any future adoption of new regulations or policies by relevant regulatory bodies, could prevent or delay approval of our products. In the event our future, or current, products, including HA generally, are classified, or re classified, as human drugs, combination products, or biologics by the FDA or an applicable international regulatory body, the applicable review process related to such products is typically substantially longer and substantially more expensive than the review process to which they are currently subject as medical devices, which could materially impact our competitive position, business, and financial results. Substantial competition could materially affect our financial performance. We compete with many companies, including large pharmaceutical companies, specialized medical products companies, and healthcare companies. Many of these companies have substantially greater financial resources, larger research and development staffs, more extensive marketing and manufacturing organizations, and more experience in the regulatory process than us. We also compete with academic institutions, government agencies, and other research organizations that may be involved in research, development, and commercialization of products similar to our own. Because a number of companies are developing or have developed HA products for similar applications and have received FDA approval, the successful commercialization of a particular product will depend in part upon our ability to complete clinical studies and obtain FDA marketing and foreign regulatory approvals prior to our competitors, or, if regulatory approval is not obtained prior to our competitors, to identify markets for our products that may be sufficient to permit meaningful sales of our products. For example, we are aware of several companies that are developing and or marketing products utilizing HA for a variety of human applications. In some cases, competitors have already obtained product approvals, submitted applications for approval, or have commenced human clinical studies, either in the United States or in certain foreign countries. There exist major competing products for the use of HA in ophthalmic surgery. In addition, certain HA products made by our competitors for the treatment of osteoarthritis in the knee have received FDA approval before ours and have been marketed in the United States since 1997, as well as select markets in Canada, Europe, and other countries. There can be no assurance that we will be able to compete against current or future competitors or that competition will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. 14 We may rely on third parties to support certain aspects of our clinical trials. If these third parties do not successfully carry out their contractual duties or meet expected deadlines, we may not be able to obtain regulatory approval or commercialize our products and our business could be substantially harmed. We have hired experienced clinical development and regulatory staff, and we have also retained the services of knowledgeable external service providers, including consultants and clinical research organizations, to develop and supervise our clinical trials and regulatory processes. Despite our internal investment in staffing, we will remain dependent upon these third party contract research organizations to carry out portions of our clinical and preclinical research studies for the foreseeable future. As a result, we have had and will have less control over the conduct of the clinical trials, the timing and completion of the trials, the required reporting of adverse events, and the management of data developed through the trials than would be the case if we were relying entirely on our own staff. Outside parties may have staffing difficulties, may undergo changes in priorities or may become financially distressed, adversely affecting their willingness or ability to conduct our trials. Failure by these third parties to comply with regulatory requirements or to meet timing expectations may require us to repeat clinical or preclinical trials, which would delay the regulatory approval process, or require substantial unexpected expenditures. We are dependent upon marketing and distribution partners and the failure to maintain strategic alliances on acceptable terms will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our success will be dependent, in part, upon the efforts of our marketing and distribution partners and the terms and conditions of our relationships with such partners. 1 partner, DePuy Synthes Mitek Sports Medicine ( Mitek ), accounted for 72% of our product revenue in fiscal year 2014. We cannot assure you that our partners, including Mitek, will not seek to renegotiate their current agreements on terms less favorable to us or terminate such agreements. A failure to renew these partnerships on terms satisfactory to us, or at all, could result in a material adverse effect on our operating results. We continue to seek to establish long term distribution relationships in regions and countries not covered by existing agreements, and we may need to obtain the assistance of additional marketing partners to bring new and existing products to market and to replace certain marketing partners. There can be no assurance that we will be able to identify or engage appropriate distribution or collaboration partners or effectively transition to any such partners. The failure to establish strategic partnerships for the marketing and distribution of our products on acceptable terms and within our planned timeframes could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We must achieve market acceptance of our products in order to be successful in the future. Our success will depend in part upon the acceptance of our existing and future products by the medical community, hospitals and physicians and other health care providers, third party payers, and end users. Such acceptance may depend upon the extent to which the medical community and end users perceive our products as safer, more effective, or cost competitive than other similar products. Ultimately, for our new products to gain general market acceptance, it may also be necessary for us to develop marketing partners or viable commercial strategies for the distribution of our products. There can be no assurance that our new products will achieve significant market acceptance on a timely basis, or at all. Failure of some or all of our future products to achieve significant market acceptance could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Our manufacturing processes involve inherent risks, and disruption could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. The operation of biomedical manufacturing plants involves many risks, including the risks of breakdown, failure, or substandard performance of equipment, the occurrence of natural and other disasters, and the need to comply with the requirements of directives of government agencies, including the FDA. In addition, we rely on a single supplier for certain key raw materials and a small number of suppliers for a number of other materials required for the manufacturing and delivery of our HA products. Although we believe that alternative sources for many of these and other comp1nts and raw materials that we use in our manufacturing processes are available, we cannot be certain that the supply of key raw materials, specifically HA, will continue be available at current levels or will be sufficient to meet our future needs. Any supply interruption could harm our ability to manufacture our products until a new source of supply is identified and qualified. We also rely on a single supplier for certain finished products, and if such manufacturer fails to meet production or delivery schedules, it could have an adverse impact on our ability to sell such products. We may not be able to find a sufficient alternative supplier in a reasonable time period, or on commercially reasonable terms, if at all, and our ability to produce and supply our products could be impaired. 15 We use raw materials derived from animal sources to produce certain of our products, and there is no guarantee that we will be able to continue to utilize this source of material in the future. Our manufacturing processes and research and development efforts for some of our ophthalmic and veterinary products involve products derived from animals. We procure our animal derived raw materials from a qualified vendor, who controls for contamination and has processes that effectively inactivate infectious agents; however, we cannot assure you that we can completely eliminate the risk of transmission of infectious agents. Furthermore, regulatory authorities could in the future impose restrictions on the use of animal derived raw materials that could impact our business. The utilization of animals in research and development and product commercialization is subject to increasing focus by animal rights activists. The activities of animal rights groups and other organizations that have protested animal based research and development programs or boycotted the products resulting from such programs could cause an interruption in our manufacturing processes and research and development efforts. The occurrence of material operational problems, including but not limited to the events described above, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations during the period of such operational difficulties and beyond. Our financial performance depends on the continued sales growth and increasing demand for our products and we may not be able to successfully manage the expansion of our operations. Our future success depends on substantial growth in product sales. There can be no assurance that such growth can be achieved or, if achieved, sustained. There can be no assurance that, even if substantial growth in product sales and the demand for our products is achieved, we will be able to Develop and maintain the necessary manufacturing capabilities; Obtain the assistance of additional marketing partners or develop appropriate alternative sales strategies; Attract, retain and integrate required key personnel; and Implement the financial, accounting and management systems needed to manage growing demand for our products. Our failure to successfully manage future growth could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We engage in acquisitions as a part of our growth strategy, which exposes us to a variety of risks that could adversely affect our business operations. Our business strategy includes the acquisition of businesses, technologies, services, or products that we believe are a strategic fit with our business. We may fund these acquisitions by utilizing our cash, incurring debt, issuing additional shares of our common stock, or by other means. Completed acquisitions may expose us to a number of risks and expenses, including unanticipated liabilities, amortization expenses related to intangible assets with definite lives, or risks associated with entering new markets with which we have limited experience or where commercial alliances with experienced partners or existing sales channels are not available. Whether or not completed, acquisitions may result in diversion of management resources otherwise available for ongoing development of our business and significant expenditures. 16 We may not be able to realize the expected benefits of any completed acquisitions, including synergies and cost savings from the integration of acquired businesses or assets with our existing operations and technologies, as rapidly as expected, or at all. In addition, the integration and reorganization processes for our acquisitions may be complex, costly, and time consuming and include unanticipated issues, expenses, and liabilities. We may have difficulty in developing, manufacturing and marketing the products of a newly acquired company in a manner that enhances the performance of our combined businesses or product lines and allows us to realize value from expected synergies. Moreover, we may lose key clients or employees of acquired businesses as a result of the change in ownership to us. Following an acquisition, we may not achieve the revenue or net income levels that justify the acquisition. Acquisitions may also result in 1 time charges, such as write offs or restructuring charges, impairment of goodwill or acquired In Process Research and Development, which could adversely affect our operating results. The failure to achieve the expected benefits of any acquisition may harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We may not fully realize the intended benefits of our restructuring plan. On December 28, 2012, we announced a strategic shift involving the closure of our tissue engineering facility in Abano Terme, Italy due to the inability to meet strict regulatory standards established by the European Medicines Agency for ATMP (cell based) products that became effective January 1, 2013 The restructuring plan adopted included a reduction in force of 12 people, and the disposal of related supplies, equipment and other assets. We completed the restructuring plan within the first six months of 2013 The restructuring plan was intended to improve the efficiency and financial performance of our Italian operations by reducing costs and focusing on products and technology with strong commercial potential. There is no guarantee that the restructuring plan will produce the expected future savings. We may face circumstances in the future that will result in impairment charges, including, but not limited to, goodwill impairment and IPR&D charges. As of December 31, 2014, we had long lived assets, including goodwill, of $55 million. If the fair value of any of our long lived assets decreases as a result of an economic slowdown, a downturn in the markets where we sell products and services, or a downturn in our financial performance or future outlook, we may be required to record an impairment charge on such assets. We are required to test intangible assets with indefinite life periods for potential impairment annually and on an interim basis if there are indicators of a potential impairment. We also are required to evaluate amortizable intangible assets and fixed assets for impairment if there are indicators of a possible impairment. Impairment charges could have a negative impact on our results of operations and financial position, as well as on the market price of our common stock. Customer, vendor and employee uncertainty about the effects of any acquisitions could harm us. We and the customers of any companies we acquire may, in response to the consummation of any acquisitions, delay or defer purchasing decisions. Any delay or deferral in purchasing decisions by customers could adversely affect our business. Similarly, employees of acquired companies may experience uncertainty about their future role until or after we execute our strategies with regard to employees of acquired companies. This may adversely affect our ability to attract and retain key management, sales, marketing, and technical personnel following an acquisition. The acquisitions we have made or may make in the future may make us the subject of lawsuits from either an acquired company stockholders, an acquired company previous stockholders or our current stockholders. We may be the subject of lawsuits from either an acquired company stockholders, an acquired company previous stockholders, or our current stockholders. These lawsuits could result from the actions of the acquisition target prior to the date of the acquisition, from the acquisition transaction itself, or from actions after the acquisition. Defending potential lawsuits could cost us significant expense and distract management attention from the operation of the business. Additionally, these lawsuits could result in the cancellation of or the inability to renew, certain insurance coverage that would be necessary to protect our assets. 17 Attractive acquisition opportunities may not be available to us in the future. We will consider the acquisition of other businesses. However, we may not locate suitable acquisition targets or have the opportunity to make acquisitions of such targets on favorable terms in the future, which could negatively impact the growth of our business. In order to pursue such opportunities, we may require significant additional financing, which may not be available to us on favorable terms, if at all. The availability of such financing is limited by the continued tightening of the global credit markets. We expect that our competitors, many of which have significantly greater resources than we do, will compete with us to acquire compatible businesses. This competition could increase prices for acquisitions that we would likely pursue. Sales of our products are largely dependent upon third party reimbursement and our performance may be harmed by health care cost containment initiatives. In the United States and other foreign markets, health care providers, such as hospitals and physicians, that purchase health care products, such as our products, generally rely on third party payers, including Medicare, Medicaid and other health insurance and managed care plans, to reimburse all or part of the cost of the health care product. We generally depend upon the distributors of our products to secure reimbursement and reimbursement approvals. Reimbursement by third party payers, both in the United States and internationally, may depend on a number of factors, including the payer determination that the use of our products is clinically useful and cost effective, medically necessary, and not experimental or investigational. Since reimbursement approval is required from each payer individually, seeking such approvals can be a time consuming and costly process which, in the future, could require us or our marketing partners to provide supporting scientific, clinical, and cost effectiveness data for the use of our products to each payer separately. Significant uncertainty exists as to the reimbursement status of newly approved health care products, and any failure or delay in obtaining reimbursement approvals can negatively impact sales of our new products. In addition, third party payers are increasingly attempting to contain the costs of health care products and services by limiting both coverage and the level of reimbursement for new therapeutic products and by refusing, in some cases, to provide coverage for uses of approved products for disease indications for which the FDA, or the applicable foreign regulatory agency, has granted marketing approval. Also, the U.S. Congress, certain state legislatures, and certain foreign governments and regulatory agencies have considered reforms that may affect current reimbursement practices, including controls on health care spending through limitations on the growth of Medicare and Medicaid spending. There can be no assurance that third party reimbursement coverage will be available or adequate for any products or services developed by us. Outside the United States, the success of our products is also dependent in part upon the availability of reimbursement and health care payment systems. Domestic and international reimbursement laws and regulations may change from time to time. Lack of adequate coverage and reimbursement provided by governments and other third party payers for our products and services, including continuing coverage for MONOVISC and ORTHOVISC in the United States, and any change of classification by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for ORTHOVISC and MONOVISC, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We may seek financing in the future, which could be difficult to obtain and which could dilute your ownership interest or the value of your shares. We had cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $106.9 million at December 31, 2014. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend, however, on numerous factors, including Market acceptance of our existing and future products; The success and sales of our products under various distributor agreements, including the ability of our partners to achieve third party reimbursement for our products; The successful commercialization of products in development; Progress in our product development efforts; The magnitude and scope of such product development efforts; Any potential acquisitions of products, technologies, or businesses; 18 Progress with preclinical studies, clinical trials, and product approvals and clearances by the FDA and other agencies; The cost and timing of our efforts to manage our manufacturing capabilities and related costs; The cost of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights and the cost of defending any other legal proceeding; Competing technological and market developments; The development of strategic alliances for the marketing of certain of our products; The terms of such strategic alliances, including provisions (and our ability to satisfy such provisions) that provide upfront and or milest1 payments to us; and The cost of maintaining adequate inventory levels to meet current and future product demand. To the extent funds generated from our operations, together with our existing capital resources, are insufficient to meet future requirements, we will be required to obtain additional funds through equity or debt financings, through strategic alliances with corporate partners and others or through other sources. The terms of any future equity financings may be dilutive to our investors and the terms of any debt financings may contain restrictive covenants, which limit our ability to pursue certain courses of action. Our ability to obtain financing is dependent on the status of our future business prospects as well as conditions prevailing in the relevant capital markets at the time we seek financing. No assurance can be given that any additional financing will be made available to us or will be available on acceptable terms should such a need arise. We could become subject to product liability claims, which, if successful, could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The testing, marketing, and sale of human health care products entail an inherent risk of allegations of product liability, and there can be no assurance that substantial product liability claims will not be asserted against us. Although we have not received any material product liability claims to date and have an insurance policy of $5,000,000 per occurrence and $5,000,000 in the aggregate to cover such product liability claims should they arise, there can be no assurance that material claims will not arise in the future or that our insurance will be adequate to cover all situations. Moreover, there can be no assurance that such insurance, or additional insurance, if required, will be available in the future or, if available, will be available on commercially reasonable terms. Any product liability claim, if successful, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Our business is dependent upon hiring and retaining qualified management and technical personnel. We are highly dependent on the members of our management and technical staff, and the loss of 1 or more of whom could have a material adverse effect on us. We have experienced a number of management changes in recent years, and there can be no assurances that such management changes will not adversely affect our business. We believe that our future success will depend in large part upon our ability to attract and retain technical and highly skilled managerial and manufacturing personnel. We face significant competition for such personnel from competitive companies, research and academic institutions, government entities, and other organizations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in hiring or retaining the personnel we require. The failure to hire and retain such personnel could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We are subject to environmental regulations and any failure to comply with applicable laws could subject us to significant liabilities and harm our business. We are subject to a variety of local, state, federal, and foreign government regulations relating to the storage, discharge, handling, emission, generation, manufacture, and disposal of toxic or other hazardous substances used in the manufacture of our products. Any failure by us to control the use, disposal, removal, or storage of hazardous chemicals or toxic substances could subject us to significant liabilities, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. 19 As our international sales and operations grow, including through our acquisition of Anika S.r.l., we could become increasingly subject to additional economic, political, and other risks that could harm our business. Since we manufacture and sell our products worldwide, our business is subject to risks associated with doing business internationally. During the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013, and 2012, 13%, 23%, and 19%, respectively, of our product sales were to international distributors. We continue to be subject to a variety of risks, which could cause fluctuations in the results of our international and domestic operations. These risks include The impact of recessions and other economic conditions in economies, including Europe in particular, outside the United States; Instability of foreign economic, political, and labor conditions; Unfavorable labor regulations applicable to our European operations, such as severance and the unenforceability of non competition agreements in the European Union; The impact of strikes, work stoppages, work slowdowns, grievances, complaints, claims of unfair labor practices, or other collective bargaining disputes; Difficulties in complying with restrictions imposed by regulatory or market requirements, tariffs, or other trade barriers or by U.S. export laws; Imposition of government controls limiting the volume of international sales; Longer accounts receivable payment cycles; Potentially adverse tax consequences, including, if required or applicable, difficulties transferring funds generated in non U.S. jurisdictions to the United States in a tax efficient manner; Difficulties in protecting intellectual property, especially in international jurisdictions; Difficulties in managing international operations; and Burdens of complying with a wide variety of foreign laws. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate and address these risks. We cannot guarantee that these or other factors will not adversely affect our business or operating results. Currency exchange rate fluctuations may have a negative impact on our reported earnings. Approximately 7% of our business during fiscal year 2014 was conducted in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar, which is our reporting currency. Thus, currency fluctuations among the U.S. dollar and the other currencies in which we do business have caused and will continue to cause foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Currently, we attempt to manage foreign currency risk through the matching of assets and liabilities. In the future, we may undertake to manage foreign currency risk through additional hedging methods. We recognize foreign currency gains or losses arising from our operations in the period incurred. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in managing foreign currency risk or in predicting the effects of exchange rate fluctuations upon our future operating results because of the variability of currency exposure and the potential volatility of currency exchange rates. A significant portion of our revenues are derived from a small number of customers, the loss of which could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. We have historically derived the majority of our revenues from a small number of customers, most of whom resell our products to end users and most of whom are significantly larger companies than us. For the year ended December 31, 2014, five customers accounted for 85% of product revenue, with Mitek al1 accounting for 72% of product revenue. We expect to continue to be dependent on a small number of large customers, especially Mitek, for the majority of our revenues for the foreseeable future. The failure of these customers to purchase our products in the amounts they historically have or in amounts that we expect would seriously harm our business. 20 In addition, if present and future customers terminate their purchasing arrangements with us, significantly reduce or delay their orders, or seek to renegotiate their agreements on terms less favorable to us, our business, financial condition, and results of operations will be adversely affected. If we accept terms less favorable than the terms of the current agreements, such renegotiations may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and or results of operations. Furthermore, in any future negotiations we may be subject to the perceived or actual leverage that these customers may have given their relative size and importance to us. Any termination, change, reduction, or delay in orders could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Accordingly, unless and until we diversify and expand our customer base, or develop alternative commercial strategies, our future success will significantly depend upon the timing and size of future purchases by our largest customers, and the financial and operational success of these customers. The loss of any 1 of our major customers or the delay of significant orders from such customers, even if only temporary, could reduce or delay our recognition of revenues, harm our reputation in the industry, and reduce our ability to accurately predict cash flow, and, as a consequence, it could seriously harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Information security breaches or business system disruptions may adversely affect our business. We rely on our information technology infrastructure and management information systems to effectively run our business. While we have not previously experienced a material information security breach caused by illegal hacking, computer viruses, or acts of vandalism or terrorism, we may in the future be subject to such a breach. Our security measures or those of our third party service providers may not detect or prevent such breaches. Any such compromise to our information security could result in an interruption in our operations, the unauthorized publication of our confidential business or proprietary information, the unauthorized release of customer, vendor, or employee data, the violation of privacy, or other laws and exposure to litigation, any of which could harm our business and operating results. The impact of U.S. healthcare reform legislation on us remains uncertain but could be significant. In 2010, federal legislation to reform the U.S. healthcare system was enacted into law in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The legislation is intended to expand access to health insurance coverage, improve quality, and reduce costs over time. We expect the new law will impact certain aspects of our business. However, it remains unclear how the new law will impact patient access to new technologies or reimbursement rates under the Medicare program as such access or rates pertain to us. Many of the details of the new law will be included in new and revised regulations, the totality of which have not yet been promulgated, and will require additional guidance to be provided by the Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Labor, and Department of the Treasury. We are completing our assessment of the new law on our business. The legislation could have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flows, financial condition, and results of operations. Our business may be adversely affected if consolidation in the healthcare industry leads to demand for price concessions or if we are excluded from being a supplier by a group purchasing organization or similar entity. Because healthcare costs have risen significantly over the past decade, numerous initiatives and reforms have been launched by legislators, regulators, and third party payers to curb these costs. As a result, there has been a consolidation trend in the healthcare industry to create larger companies, including hospitals, with greater market power. As the healthcare industry consolidates, competition to provide products and services to industry participants has become and may continue to become more intense. This may result in greater pricing pressures and the exclusion of certain suppliers from important markets as group purchasing organizations, independent delivery ne2rks, and large single accounts continue to use their market power to consolidate purchasing decisions. If a group purchasing organization excludes us from being 1 of their suppliers, our net sales could be adversely impacted. We expect that market demand, government regulation, third party reimbursement policies, and societal pressures will continue to change the worldwide healthcare industry, which may exert further downward pressure on the prices of our products. We experience quarterly sales volume variation, which makes our future results difficult to predict and makes period to period comparisons potentially not meaningful. We experience quarterly fluctuations in our products sales as a result of multiple factors, many of which are outside of our control. These quarterly fluctuations create uncertainty as to the volume of sales that we may achieve in a given period. As a result, comparing our operating results on a period to period basis might not be meaningful. You should not rely on our past results as an indication of our future performance. Our operating results could be disproportionately affected by a reduction in revenue because a proportionately smaller amount of our expenses varies with our revenue. As a result, our quarterly operating results are difficult to predict, even in the near term. 21 Risks Related to Our Intellectual Property We may be unable to adequately protect our intellectual property rights, which could have a material impact on our business and future financial results. Our efforts to enforce our intellectual property rights may not be successful. We rely on a combination of copyright, trademark, patent, and trade secret laws, confidentiality procedures, and contractual provisions to protect our proprietary rights. Our success will depend, in part, on our ability to obtain and enforce patents and trademarks, to protect trade secrets, to obtain licenses to technology owned by third parties when necessary, and to conduct our business without infringing on the proprietary rights of others. The patent positions of pharmaceutical, medical product, and biotechnology firms, including ours, can be uncertain and involve complex legal and factual questions. There can be no assurance that any patent applications will result in the issuance of patents or, if any patents are issued, that they will provide significant proprietary protection or commercial advantage or will not be circumvented by others. In the event a third party has also filed 1 or more patent applications for any of its inventions, we may have to participate in interference proceedings declared by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to determine priority of invention, which could result in the failure to obtain, or the loss of, patent protection for the inventions and the loss of any right to use the inventions. Even if the eventual outcome is favorable to us, such interference proceedings could result in substantial cost to us, including, but not limited to, the diversion of management attention away from our other operations. Filing and prosecution of patent applications, litigation to establish the validity and scope of patents, assertion of patent infringement claims against others, and the defense of patent infringement claims by others can be expensive and time consuming. There can be no assurance that, in the event that any claims with respect to any of our patents, if issued, are challenged by 1 or more third parties, any court or patent authority ruling on such challenge will determine that such patent claims are valid and enforceable. An adverse outcome in such litigation could cause us to lose exclusivity covered by the disputed rights. If a third party is found to have rights covering products or processes used by us, we could be forced to cease using the technologies or marketing the products covered by such rights, we could be subject to significant liabilities to such third party, and we could be required to license technologies from such third party in order to continue production of the products. Furthermore, even if our patents are determined to be valid, enforceable, and broad in scope, there can be no assurance that competitors will not be able to design around such patents and compete with us using the resulting alternative technology. We have a policy of seeking patent protection for patentable aspects of our proprietary technology. We intend to seek patent protection with respect to products and processes developed in the course of our activities when we believe such protection is in our best interest and when the cost of seeking such protection is not inordinate. However, no assurance can be given that any patent application will be filed, that any filed applications will result in issued patents, or that any issued patents will provide us with a competitive advantage or will not be successfully challenged by third parties. The protections afforded by patents will depend upon their scope and validity, and others may be able to design around our patents. We also rely upon trade secrets and proprietary know how for certain non patented aspects of our technology. To protect such information, we require all employees, consultants, and licensees to enter into confidentiality agreements limiting the disclosure and use of such information. There can be no assurance that these agreements provide meaningful protection or that they will not be breached, that we would have adequate remedies for any such breach, or that our trade secrets, proprietary know how, and our technological advances will not otherwise become known to others. In addition, there can be no assurance that, despite precautions taken by us, others have not and will not obtain access to our proprietary technology. Further, there can be no assurance that third parties will not independently develop substantially equivalent or better technology. There can be no assurance that we will not infringe upon the intellectual property rights of others, which could have a significant impact on our business and financial results. Other entities have filed patent applications for, or have been issued patents concerning, various aspects of HA related products or processes. There can be no assurance that the products or processes developed by us will not infringe on the patent rights of others in the future. The cost of defending infringement suits is typically large, and there is no guarantee that any future defense would be successful. In addition, infringement could lead to substantial damages payouts or our inability to produce or market certain of our current or future products. As a result, any such infringement may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. 22 Risks Related to Ownership of Our Common Stock Our stock price may be highly volatile, and we cannot assure you that market making in our common stock will continue. The market price of shares of our common stock may be highly volatile. Factors such as announcements of new commercial products or technological innovations by us or our competitors, disclosure of results of clinical testing or regulatory proceedings, government regulation and approvals, developments in patent or other proprietary rights, public concern as to the safety of products developed by us, and general market conditions may have a significant effect on the market price of our common stock. The trading price of our common stock could be subject to wide fluctuations in response to quarter to quarter variations in our operating results, material announcements by us or our competitors, governmental regulatory action, conditions in the health care industry generally or in the medical products industry specifically, or other events or factors, many of which are beyond our control. In addition, the stock market has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations, which have particularly affected the market prices of many medical products companies and which often have been unrelated to the operating performance of such companies. Our operating results in future quarters may be below the expectations of equity research analysts and investors. In such an event, the price of our common stock would likely decline, perhaps substantially. If securities or industry analysts do not publish or cease publishing research or reports about us, our business, or our market, or if they adversely change their recommendations regarding our stock, our stock price and trading volume could decline. The trading market for our common stock is influenced by the research and reports that securities or industry analysts may publish about us, our business, our market, or our competitors. No person is under any obligation to publish research or reports on us, and any person publishing research or reports on us may discontinue doing so at any time without notice. If adequate research coverage is not maintained on our company or if any of the analysts who cover us downgrade our stock or publish inaccurate or unfavorable research about our business or provide relatively more favorable recommendations about our competitors, our stock price would likely decline. If any analysts who cover us were to cease coverage of our company or fail to regularly publish reports on us, we could lose visibility in the financial markets, which in turn could cause our stock price or trading volume to decline. We do not intend to pay dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock. We currently intend to retain earnings, if any, for use in our business and do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, investors are not likely to receive any dividends on their common stock in the foreseeable future, and their ability to achieve a return on their investment will therefore depend on appreciation in the price of our common stock. Our charter documents contain anti takeover provisions that may prevent or delay an acquisition of our company. Certain provisions of our Restated Articles of Organization and Amended and Restated By laws could have the effect of discouraging a third party from pursuing a non negotiated takeover of us and preventing certain changes in control. These provisions include a classified Board of Directors, advance notice to the Board of Directors of stockholder proposals, limitations on the ability of stockholders to remove directors and to call stockholder meetings, and the provision that vacancies on the Board of Directors be filled by vote of a majority of the remaining directors. In addition, the Board of Directors adopted a ten year Shareholders Rights Plan in April 2008. We are also subject to Chapter 110F of the Massachusetts General Laws which, subject to certain exceptions, prohibits a Massachusetts corporation from engaging in any of a broad range of business combinations with any interested stockholder for a period of 3 years following the date that such stockholder becomes an interested stockholder. All of these provisions, policies, and plans are reviewed periodically by our Board of Directors. These provisions could discourage a third party from pursuing a takeover of us at a price considered attractive by many stockholders, since such provisions could have the effect of preventing or delaying a potential acquirer from acquiring control of us and our Board of Directors. 23 ITEM ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS N1 ITEM ITEM 2 PROPERTIES
